
In a previous video, I shared how data analysis helped a company figure out where to advertise its services. An important part of this process was strong problem-solving skills. As a data analyst, you'll find that problems are at the center of what you do every single day, but that's a good thing. Think of problems as opportunities to put your skills to work and find creative and insightful solutions. Problems can be small or large, simple or complex, no problem is like another and they all require a slightly different approach but the first step is always the same. Understanding what problem you're trying to solve and that's what we're going to talk about now. Data analysts work with a variety of problems. In this video, we're going to focus on six common types. These include: making predictions, categorizing things, spotting something unusual, identifying themes, discovering connections, and finding patterns. Let's define each of these now. First, making predictions. This problem type involves using data to make an informed decision about how things may be in the future. For example, a hospital system might use a remote patient monitoring to predict health events for chronically ill patients. The patients would take their health vitals at home every day, and that information combined with data about their age, risk factors, and other important details could enable the hospital's algorithm to predict future health problems and even reduce future hospitalizations. The next problem type is categorizing things. This means assigning information to different groups or clusters based on common features. An example of this problem type is a manufacturer that reviews data on shop floor employee performance. An analyst may create a group for employees who are most and least effective at engineering. A group for employees who are most and least effective at repair and maintenance, most and least effective at assembly, and many more groups or clusters. Next, we have spotting something unusual. In this problem type, data analysts identify data that is different from the norm. An instance of spawning something unusual in the real world is a school system that has a sudden increase in the number of students registered, maybe as big as a 30 percent jump in the number of students. A data analyst might look into this upswing and discover that several new apartment complexes had been built in the school district earlier that year. They could use this analysis to make sure the school has enough resources to handle the additional students. Identifying themes is the next problem type. Identifying themes takes categorization as a step further by grouping information into broader concepts. Going back to our manufacturer that has just reviewed data on the shop floor employees. First, these people are grouped by types and tasks. But now a data analyst could take those categories and group them into the broader concept of low productivity and high productivity. This would make it possible for the business to see who is most and least productive, in order to reward top performers and provide additional support to those workers who need more training. Now, the problem type of discovering connections enables data analysts to find similar challenges faced by different entities, and then combine data and insights to address them. Here's what I mean; say a scooter company is experiencing an issue with the wheels it gets from its wheel supplier. That company would have to stop production until it could get safe quality wheels back in stock. But meanwhile, the wheel companies encountering the problem with the rubber it uses to make wheels, turns out its rubber supplier could not find the right materials either. If all of these entities could talk about the problems they're facing and share data openly, they would find a lot of similar challenges and better yet, be able to collaborate to find a solution. The final problem type is finding patterns. Data analysts use data to find patterns by using historical data to understand what happened in the past and is therefore likely to happen again. Ecommerce companies use data to find patterns all the time. Data analysts look at transaction data to understand customer buying habits at certain points in time throughout the year. They may find that customers buy more can't gets right before a hurricane, or they purchase fewer cold-weather accessories like hats and gloves during warmer months. The ecommerce companies can use these insights to make sure they stock the right amount of products at these key times. You've now learned six basic problem types that data analysts typically face. As a future data analyst, this is going to be valuable knowledge for your career. Coming up, we'll talk a bit more about these problem types and I'll provide even more examples of them being solved by data analysts. Personally, I love real-world examples. They really help me better understand new concepts. I can't wait to share even more actual cases with you. See you there.

# Problems in the real world


You've been learning about six common problem types of data analysts encounter, making predictions, categorizing things, spotting something unusual, identifying themes, discovering connections, and finding patterns. Let's think back to our real world example from a previous video. In that example, anywhere gaming repair wanted to figure out how to bring in new customers. So the problem was, how to determine the best advertising method for anywhere gaming repairs target audience. To help solve this problem, the company used data to envision what would happen if it advertised in different places. Now nobody can see the future but the data helped them make an informed decision about how things would likely work out. So there problem type was making predictions. Now let's think about the second problem type, categorizing things. Here's an example of a problem that involves categorization. Let's say a business wants to improve its customer satisfaction levels. Data analysts could review recorded calls to the company's customer service department and evaluate the satisfaction levels of each caller. They could identify certain key words or phrases that come up during the phone calls and then assign them to categories such as politeness, satisfaction, dissatisfaction, empathy, and more. Categorizing these key words gives us data that lets the company identify top performing customer service representatives, and those who might need more coaching. This leads to happier customers and higher customer service scores. Okay, now let's talk about a problem that involves spotting something unusual. Some of you may have a smart watch, my favorite app is for health tracking. These apps can help people stay healthy by collecting data such as their heart rate, sleep patterns, exercise routine, and much more. There are many stories out there about health apps actually saving people's lives. One is about a woman who was young, athletic, and had no previous medical problems. One night she heard a beep on her smartwatch, a notification said her heart rate had spiked. Now in this example think of the watch as a data analyst. The watch was collecting and analyzing health data. So when her resting heart rate was suddenly 120 beats per minute, the watch spotted something unusual because according to its data, the rate was normally around 70. Thanks to data her smart watch gave her the women went to the hospital and discovered she had a condition which could have led to life threatening complications if she hadn't got in medical help. Now let's move on to the next type of problem, identifying themes. We see a lot of examples of this in the user experience field. User experience designers study and work to improve the interactions people have with products they use every day. Let's say a user experience designer wants to see what customers think about the coffee maker his company manufacturers. This business collects anonymous survey data from users, which can be used to answer this question. But first to make sense of it all, he will need to find themes that represent the most valuable data, especially information he can use to make the user experience even better. So the problem the user experience designers company faces, is how to improve the user experience for its coffee makers. The process here is kind of like finding categories for key words and phrases and customer service conversations. But identifying themes goes even further by grouping each insight into a broader theme. Then the designer can pinpoint the themes that are most common. In this case he learned users often couldn't tell if the coffee maker was on or off. He ended up optimizing the design with improved placement and lighting for the on off button leading to the product improvement and happier users. Now we come to the problem of discovering connections. This example is from the transportation industry and uses something called third party logistics. Third party logistics partners help businesses ship products when they don't have their own trucks, planes or ships. A common problem these partners face is figuring out how to reduce wait time. Wait time happens when a truck driver from the third party logistics provider arrives to pick up a shipment but it's not ready. So she has to wait. That costs both companies time and money and it stops trucks from getting back on the road to make more deliveries. So how can they solve this? Well, by sharing data the partner companies can view each other's timelines and see what's causing shipments to run late. Then they can figure out how to avoid those problems in the future. So problem for one business doesn't cause a negative impact for the other. For example, if shipments are running late because one company only delivers Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and the other company only delivers Tuesdays and Thursdays, then the companies can choose to deliver on the same day to reduce wait time for customers. All right, we've come to our final problem type, finding patterns. Oil and gas companies are constantly working to keep their machines running properly. So the problem is, how to stop machines from breaking down. One way data analysts can do this is by looking at patterns in the company's historical data. For example, they could investigate how and when a particular machine broke down in the past and then generate insights into what led to the breakage. In this case, the company saw pattern indicating that machines began breaking down at faster rates when maintenance wasn't kept up in 15 day cycles. They can then keep track of current conditions and intervene if any of these issues happen again. Pretty cool, right? I'm always amazed to hear about how data helps real people and businesses make meaningful change. I hope you are too. See you soon.

# Anmol: From hypothesis to outcome

Hi, I'm Anmol. I'm the Head of Large Advertiser Marketing Analytics within the Marketing Team at Google. At its core, my job is about connecting the right user with the right message at the right time. The first step is really to get a broad sense of the certain pattern that's occurring. So for example, we know that this particular segment of users is more responsive to this type of content. Once we're able to actually see this hypothesis through the data, we do testing to ensure that the hypothesis is actually correct. So for example, we would test sending these pieces of content to this segment of users, and actually verify within a controlled environment whether that response rate is actually higher for that type of content, or whether it isn't. Once we're able to actually verify that hypothesis, we go back to the stakeholders, in this case, our marketers, and say, we've proven within a relatively high degree of certainty that this particular segment is more responsive to this type of content, and because of that, we're recommending that you produce more of this type of content. Our stakeholders really get to see the whole evolution from hypothesis to proven concept, and they're able to come with us on the journey on how we're proving out these hypotheses and then eventually turning them into strategies and recommendations for the business. The outcome in this case was that we were able to actually change the way our whole marketing team worked to actually make it much more user-centric. Instead of, from our perspective, coming up with content that we think the users need, we're actually going in the other direction of figuring out what users need first, proving that they need certain things or they don't need certain things, and then using that information going back to marketers and coming up with content that fulfills their need. So it really changed the direction of how we produce things.
