
Welcome to the second course in the Google Data Analytics certificate. If you completed Course One, we met briefly at the beginning, but for those of you who are just joining us, my name is Ximena, and I'm a Google Finance data analyst. I think it's really wonderful that you're here with me learning about the fascinating field of data analytics. Learning and education have always been very important to me. When I was young, my mom always said, "I can't leave you an inheritance, but I can give you an education that opens doors." That always pushed me to keep learning, and that education gave me the confidence to apply for my job at Google. Now I get to do really meaningful work every day. Just recently I worked as an analyst on a team called Verily Life Sciences. We were helping to get life-saving medical supplies to those who need it most. To do this, we forecasted what health care professionals would need on hand and then shared that information with networks. The information that my team provided helped make data driven decisions that actually saved lives. I'm thrilled to be your instructor for this course. We're going to talk about the difference between effective and ineffective questions and learn how to ask great questions that lead to insights that can help you solve business problems. You will discover that effective questions help you to make the most of all the data analysis phases. You may remember that these phases include ask, prepare, process, analyze, share, and act. In the ask step, we define the problem we're solving and make sure that we fully understand stakeholder expectations. This will help keep you focused on the actual problem, which leads to more successful outcomes. So we'll begin this course by talking about problem solving and some of the common types of business problems that data analysts help solve. And because this course focuses on the ask phase, you'll learn how to craft effective questions that help you collect the right data to solve those problems. Next, we'll talk about the many different types of data. You'll learn how and when each is the most useful. You'll also get a chance to explore spreadsheets further and discover how they can help make your data analysis even more effective. And then we'll start learning about structured thinking. Structured thinking is the process of recognizing the current problem or situation, organizing available information, revealing gaps and opportunities, and identifying the options. In this process, you address a vague, complex problem by breaking it down into smaller steps, and then those steps lead you to a logical solution. We'll work together to be sure you fully understand how to use structured thinking and data analysis. Finally, we'll learn some proven strategies for communicating with others effectively. I can't wait to share more about my passion for data analytics with you, so let's get started.

Course 2 – Ask Questions to Make Data-Driven Decisions

1.  **Asking effective questions:** To do the job of a data analyst, you need to ask questions and problem-solve. In this part of the course, you’ll check out some common analysis problems and how analysts solve them. You’ll also learn about effective questioning techniques that can help guide your analysis.
    
2.  **Making data-driven decisions:** In analytics, data drives decision making. In this part of the course, you’ll explore data of all kinds and its impact on decision making. You’ll also learn how to share your data through reports and dashboards.
    
3.  **Mastering spreadsheet basics:** Spreadsheets are an important data analytics tool. In this part of the course, you’ll learn both why and how data analysts use spreadsheets in their work. You’ll also explore how structured thinking can help analysts better understand problems and come up with solutions. 
    
4.  **Always remembering the stakeholder:** Successful data analysts learn to balance needs and expectations. In this part of the course, you’ll learn strategies for managing the expectations of stakeholders while establishing clear communication with your team to achieve your objectives.  
    
5.  **Completing the Course Challenge:** At the end of this course, you will be able to put everything you have learned into practice with the Course Challenge. The Course Challenge will ask you questions about key principles you have been learning about and then give you an opportunity to apply those principles in three scenarios.

# Data in action


In this video, I'm going to share an interesting data analytics case study, it will illustrate how problem solving relates to each phase of the data analysis process and shed some light on how these phases work in the real world. It's about a small business that used data to solve a unique problem it was facing. The business is called Anywhere Gaming Repair. It's a service provider that comes to you to fix your broken video game systems or accessories. The owner wanted to expand his business. He knew advertising is a proven way to get more customers, but he wasn't sure where to start. There are all kinds of different advertising strategies, including print, billboards, TV commercials, public transportation, podcasts, and radio. One of the key things to think about when choosing an advertising method is your target audience, in other words, the specific people you're trying to reach. For example, if a medical equipment manufacturer wanted to reach doctors, placing an ad in a health magazine would be a smart choice. Or if a catering company wanted to find new cooks, it might advertise using a poster at a bus stop near a cooking school. Both of these are great ways to get your ad seen by your target audience. The second thing to think about is your budget and how much the different advertising methods will cost. For instance, a TV ad is likely to be more expensive than a radio ad. A large billboard will probably cost more than a small poster on the back of a city bus. The business owner asked a data analyst, Maria, to make a recommendation. She started with the first step in the data analysis process, Ask. Maria began by defining the problem that needed to be solved. To do this, she first had to zoom out and look at the whole situation in context. That way she could be sure that she was focusing on the real problem and not just its symptoms. This leads us to another important part of the problem solving process, collaborating with stakeholders and understanding their needs. For anywhere gaming repair, stakeholders included the owner, the vice president of communications, and the director of marketing and finance. Working together, Maria and the stakeholders agreed on the problem, not knowing their target audience's preferred type of advertising. Next step was the prepare phase, where Maria collected data for the upcoming analysis process. But first, she needed to better understand the company's target audience, people with video game systems. After that, Maria collected data on the different advertising methods. This way, she would be able to determine which was the most popular one with the company's target audience. Then she moved on to the process step. Here Maria cleaned the data to eliminate any errors or inaccuracies that could get in the way of the result. As we've learned, when you clean data, you transform it into a more useful format, create more complete information and remove outliers. Then it was time to analyze. In this step, Maria wanted to find out two things. First, who's most likely to own a video gaming system? Second, where are these people most likely to see an advertisement? Maria, first discovered that people between the ages of 18 and 34 are most likely to make video game related purchases. She could confirm that anywhere gaming repairs' target audience was people 18-34 years old. This was who they should be trying to reach. With this in mind, Maria then learned that both TV commercials and podcasts are very popular with people in the target audience. Because Maria knew Anywhere Gaming Repair had a limited budget and understanding the high cost of TV commercials, her recommendation was to advertise in podcasts because they are more cost-effective. Now that she had her analysis, it was time for Maria to share her recommendation so the company could make a data driven decision. She summarized her results using clear and compelling visuals of the analysis. This helped her stakeholders understand the solution to the original problem. Finally, Anywhere Gaming Repair took action, they worked with a local podcast production agency to create a 30 second ad about their services. The ad ran on podcast for a month, and it worked. They saw an increase in customers after just the first week. By the end of week 4, they had 85 new customers. There you go. Effective problem solving using data analysis phases in action. Now, you've seen how the six phases of data analysis can be applied to problem solving and how you can use that to solve real world problems.

# Nikki: The data process works


I'm Nikki and I manage the education, evaluation, assessment, and research team. My favorite part of the data analysis process is finding the hardest problem and asking a million questions about it and seeing if it's even possible to get an answer. One of the problems that we've tackled here at Google is our Noogler onboarding program, which is how we onboard new hires. One of the things that we've done is ask the question, how do we know whether or not Nooglers are onboarding faster through our new onboarding program than our old onboarding program where we used to lecture them. We worked really closely with the content providers to understand just exactly what does it mean to onboard someone faster? Once we asked all the questions, what we did is we prepared the data by understanding who was the population of the new hires that we were examining. We prepared our data by going through and understanding who our populations were, by understanding who our sample set was, who our control group was, who our experiment group was, where were our data sources, and make sure that it was in a set, in a format that was clean and digestible for us to write the proper scripts for. So the next step for us was to process the data to make sure that it was in a format that we could actually analyze in SQL, making sure that was in the right format, in the right columns, and in the right tables for us. To analyze the data, we wrote scripts in SQL and in R to correlate the data to the control group or the experiment group and interpret the data to understand, were there any changes in the behavioral indicators that we saw? Once we analyze all the data, we want to report on it in a way that our stakeholders could understand. Depending on who our stakeholders were, we prepared reports, dashboards and presentations, and shared that information out. Once all of our reports were complete, we saw really positive results and decided to act on it by continuing our project-based learning onboarding program. It was really satisfying to know that we have the data to support it and that it really, really worked. And not just that the data was there, but that we knew that our students were learning and that they were more productive, faster back on their jobs.