Think of the Navigator on a ship. The captain can make the decisions as to what will happen on that ship, but it is the navigator that ensures the ship gets to the right port. That is the medical office manager. Of course, the manager is also the chief boatswain, engineer, steward, deck hand, pilot, harbor pilot, docking pilot, fireman, cook, machinist, yeoman, mate, first ship’s officer, second ship’s officer, entertainment officer, grievances officer, carpenter, electrician, crow’s nest mate, as well as his or her own job of making sure that everyone does their job too.

This position is the one that SHOULD make the day to day decisions, management decisions, hiring and firing decisions, be an expert at accounts receivable, accounts payable, scheduling, inventory, HIPAA, ERISA, CLIA, OSHA, Medicare, CMS, electronic medical records, electronic prescriptions, MACRA, licensing, contracting, credentialing, conflict resolution, purchasing, insurance laws, insurance appeal and grievance procedures, federal trade commission laws, red-flag laws, state privacy laws, advertising, marketing, malpractice, liability insurance, health insurance, employee benefits, office repair and more.

Oh yeah – they also need to know how to get along with the physician’s spouse and be available as a travel agent, reservations clerk and anything else the doctor expects them to do – while making sure the practice collects enough money to pay the bills and contribute to the physician’s retirement. Oh yeah – let’s not forget that this super-human person must also be active in the local community since the office is represented by them, so they need to be able to do all of this while raising a family, going to church and keeping up with the physician’s social calendar.

One problem that many physicians make is that they expect the act of putting a wedding ring on a spouse will magically enable a spouse to be able to do all of this. WRONG! It doesn’t matter who is in this position, but they need MORE annual training than any physician needs in CMEs because they are trying to do it ALL! Insurance laws change. Fair Credit Collection laws change. 

So do procedure codes, coverage, diagnosis codes, privacy laws, HIPAA, CLIA, credentialing, and just about everything that I’ve mentioned in the previous two paragraphs. If a physician expects that knowledge to somehow be absorbed by the manager through the air without constant updates, training, networking, seminars, webinars, etc.., then they are a fool and do not deserve to be successful in their business.