I’m telling the front office staff to treat it like it’s your own money – UNTIL you collect it – but stop there – because if you treat it like it’s your own after you collect it, we’re talking embezzlement and that is not only illegal – it’s WRONG and you will be caught and if your physician asks me, I’ll recommend they prosecute and have you arrested.

I did when my own office manager embezzled from me around 1990 and I recommend it to my clients as well. If you do not prosecute, then you may be enabling them to go down the street and do the same thing to another physician. In the mid 80’s, I remember an office manager in Arlington, Texas that had always been rude to me when I called on them to sell them super bills (those are the forms that physicians used to give patients as a receipt – that allowed the patient to file their own insurance claims). For months, she would never let me talk to the doctor and was adamant about him not discussing our accounts receivable programs.

One day, while making my normal monthly calls at the clinic, I noticed a very harried woman at the reception window and disarray at her desk. There were ledger cards and day sheets everywhere and I asked if Doris (not real name) was there and she said, “hell no” and I knew then that there was a problem.

I asked if Doris had been fired and was there some kind of accounts receivable problem and the woman explained that she was the doctor’s wife and they believed that embezzlement had taken place. I spent a couple of days helping them reconstruct their ledgers and day sheets and to the best of our ability, we identified more than $65,000 had been taken (not very creatively either). I recommended the doctor prosecute – but he listened to others who convinced him not to.

Several months later, I found the same Doris in an office in Bedford working for another doctor and there was no way I was going to get to talk to the doctor. I did leave a business card on the doctor’s car (he had a sign over his space in the carport behind his office) saying that he may want to call the doctor in Arlington that Doris had previously worked for and gave him the phone number of the Arlington doctor. I understood that she left there – after embezzling and went to work for a doctor in Fort Worth.

None of the doctors prosecuted and that just helped her get away with doing it to others. When I see someone as adamant about not letting me talk to the doctor, it makes me wonder if the office manager is doing a really GOOD job of taking care of the doctor or if they are just TAKING CARE of themselves.

I read once that the AMA said that 1 out of every 3 offices suffer embezzlement or theft. After working in this business for 36 years, I’m of the belief that it’s probably 1 in every 2. Embezzlement is the fraudulent appropriation of money or other assets by someone entrusted with its care on behalf of others, but who uses it for his/her own purposes. If your employee takes paper clips home to their kids to use on a school project – that is considered employee theft. It is sad to think of the number of people that would condemn shoplifting if they were to see it, but they think nothing of taking home a stapler, highlighter, ream of copier paper, Band-Aids, ace-wrap, etc… and justify it because “they don’t pay me enough”. Some are stealing TIME by working on their resume or Facebook page or helping their children with their homework – WHILE THEY ARE BEING PAID TO WORK.

If you were paying an employee to clean your home, would you be upset to see them watching television instead of cleaning – during the hours you’re paying them?

Theft is theft – regardless of its value or form and if you do it or if you know it is happening and you are not reporting it – you’re guilty of it. If someone came into your home and was stealing silverware, dishes, toothpaste, etc. that you bought – you would consider it dishonest – and we need to have the same principle in our office.

Along the same lines, when we are discussing theft, we need to discuss when medical offices are stealing from patients or insurance carriers. Remember – when someone steals from an insurance carrier – they are stealing from every policyholder of that insurance company as the company will make up for it through increased premiums. Insurance theft should be considered no less personal than if you are reaching into your patient’s wallet and taking money that you are not entitled to and if you know of someone committing insurance fraud, the right thing is to make them stop. Sometimes it happens through mistakes or incorrect judgments and sometimes it is intentional.

If you discover that you are billing for something that is not being provided, should you immediately stop and then notify the carrier that you have been improperly paid? That sounds like the honest thing to do. Compare that to you giving a grocery store clerk a $10 bill for a $3 purchase and she gives you $17 back, thinking you had given her $20. If your son, daughter or grandchild were standing there watching this – what lesson would you teach them?

More importantly, even if they were not with you – what would YOU do? If you’re the type of person that would keep the money, thinking “it was their mistake, so I get to benefit from it”, please put this book down now, contact me and send me the book and I’ll buy it back for the price you paid as I do not want you benefiting from this book. On the other hand, if you’re the type that would give the money back to the clerk, then you should do the same thing with the money from the insurance carrier that was truly overpaid to you. This applies, in my opinion, to instances where the insurance carrier double-paid on a claim. In that case, there can be no question that you were overpaid. It gets a little trickier when the carrier pays you properly and a year or two later, they contact you and tell you that one code should have been bundled into another.

They may be using a new edit that was not in effect then or even an internal edit that no other carrier uses – but you get the demand from them for repayment. Now, it is too late for you to effectively collect from the patient, so do you really owe them the money? You rendered the service and on behalf of the patient, you accepted assignment.

If instead of sending the check directly to you, if they had sent the check to the patient and the patient presented that check to you, would YOU owe the insurance carrier the money or would the patient? Who received the services? You were paid on BEHALF OF the patient, so if any repayment to the insurance carrier is due, shouldn’t it be due from the patient? After all – it was the patient that received the services.

Along these same lines, though, if you knew at the time of service that the carrier should not have been paying for that service, then the honest thing to do – back then – was to notify the carrier that an overpayment had occurred, so time does not diminish your culpability and responsibility to make sure the right thing is done.

Insurance fraud is rampant in this country and you can barely go a month without seeing a headline indicating someone is indicted or jailed for insurance fraud. More than 20 years ago, I was working with a company in south Florida that provided a diagnostic piece of equipment to physicians and the physicians would bill the patient and/or insurance for the professional component and this company would bill Medicare and the other carriers for the technical component. If done correctly, this was perfectly legal and acceptable by all the insurance carriers.

I discovered that the company had been billing incorrectly to Medicare and the other payers for their services and as a result, they received about 20 times the amount they should have been paid. I had a meeting in the Houston airport with the CEO of that company and explained that a mistake must have been made by their billing people and he told me “There is no mistake, and this is how we should be paid, as the other way doesn’t pay us enough”.

I argued with him, unsuccessfully, that it was insurance fraud and that if they continued, I had no choice but to notify the federal officials as well as pull every one of my clients away from their service and recommend a different service that would do it legally and ethically. He didn’t believe me, so I did. I worked with the OIG and Medicare and they were subsequently put out of business.

On three different occasions, in my consulting, I’ve discovered physicians that were billing improperly to increase their income and on all 3 occasions, I warned them that they were committing fraud and all 3 continued their practices. I turned all 3 clinics into Medicare and the OIG, and I did not file a Qui Tam (Whistleblower suit) to receive a reward from the government. I turned them in because it was the right thing to do and all 3 practices were suspended from the Medicare program and fined.

I’ll continue to do so, which should be a warning to those reading this book and considering hiring me. If you desire to defraud insurance, the government, the patients or anyone else – don’t call me. If you’re doing it accidentally, I’ll help you to rectify it and keep you compliant so to keep you out of trouble. You can make a very good living in a medical practice without resorting to thievery or dishonesty.

If you lose your job because you have tried to get your employer to stop committing fraud or abuse, and they would not cease, then Qui Tam may be a way for you to recover what you’ve lost by becoming unemployed. In common law, a writ of qui tam is a writ whereby a private individual who assists a prosecution can receive all or part of any penalty imposed. The government has a program centered around Qui Tam (also called the Whistleblower Act) that allows you to receive up to 20% of the fine that is assessed against an entity that is found guilty of fraud against the federal government. I believe some states also have similar programs for state government fraud as well. The 1986 amendment to the False Claims Act (this is the act that embodies the Qui Tam) increased the minimum that the relator (person bringing the suit on behalf of the government) is awarded to 15%, with the maximum being 30%.

I believe the difference between the 2 is determined by whether the relator uses their own attorney or whether the relator uses the federal government attorneys. If you intend to file an action, you may want to talk to your own attorney before talking to the federal officials – as you may be giving 5% to 15% away by talking to the feds first. I have an attorney in Washington DC that I trust and have referred people to. In some instances, it was the physician that needed help fighting a legal injustice and in others, it was practice managers that needed to file Qui Tam on former employers.

If you need the contact information for Robert Liles, J.D., please let me know. I have used Robert myself and I trust him. Also – in 1986, the number of fines that can be assessed by the federal government increased to “treble damages”, meaning that if someone stole $1 Million dollars in fraudulent claims, then the fine could be $3 Million against that party. Again – if you lose your job by doing what is right – then you should seriously consider this option and give me a call and let’s talk.

**