
# Location
Prior to opening the doors of your practice, you should weigh several decisions carefully, after doing due diligence on the subjects we’ll discuss. Most physicians will make the decision as to where to locate the practice without seeking counsel from existing physicians in the area, and that is not the best idea. If you’re thinking of the placement of your own clinic, then it makes sense to do some homework and ask some of the other physicians in the area for their advice. Most physicians do not approach the concept of competing practices the same way that auto dealers or auto sales companies do (they do not want competition). Many are looking for someone to refer to or someone to share calls with or someone to take part of the nursing home business or emergency room duties. You do not usually see this in the auto sales arena – but you see it in the medical office family. They may know of a physician getting ready to retire or perhaps even looking for someone to mentor for a year or two before handing them the keys to a viable practice. You also want to ask whether the other physicians in the area are taking new patients, how long it takes to get an appointment as a new or established patient, whether they accept Medicare or Medicaid, etc.

As unbelievable as it may sound, there are many primary care practices that are not accepting Medicare, simply because someone has misled their physician into believing that it is a good business move to limit or exclude Medicare patients. That is not the case in 99% of primary care offices – yet we’re finding more and more that are excluding the Medicare population. There is a term for this. It’s called STUPIDITY.

In my opinion, you’ll make more money from an individual Medicare patient than you will from any other type of patient, if you are in primary care – IF you know what you’re doing and IF you’re providing GOOD medical care instead of mediocre care. We’ll get into that much more in later topics, but the lesson is that you need to do your homework before determining where you will locate your practice. One good place may be where the other primary care physicians are foolish enough to be turning away Medicare patients, so that you may have ample referrals to get your practice busy at a faster rate than otherwise. There are some consultants who specialize in helping physicians choose the most beneficial location and a medical practitioner may wish to avail themselves of this help. 

We know several and will be glad to refer to them when you ask. Please note that there is not a week that goes by where we are not referring to some other consultants when we are asked. When we first opened our consulting business, we decided that if someone else could do a better job for our client or prospect, we would refer the client or prospect to them. Yes – even if it means that we do not make any money or get the client. If someone asks me questions about psych billing, I refer to Susan. If they ask about ENT, they get Barbara Cobuzzi’s contact info. If they are trying to find a job in coding, we refer them to the Facebook pages of Jobs For American Medical Coders (JFAMC) run by Leslie Johnson and her group. 

That group was started by the late Pam Kulczar who I called my friend for about 35 years. If they want to know about cardiology, then they will learn about Terry Fletcher. If they want a billing agency, I help them find one – and no – we do not take a penny from those we are referring to and the prospect pays us nothing for that as well. After 36 years of consulting, we know most of the good ones and the not-so-good ones are.

# Marketing your Practice
There are probably a dozen books on the market today about how to market your practice and many of them have great ideas. Personally, I’m not crazy about advertising in the paper or on the radio or even on television stations (including on Cable channel 1 that runs nothing but printed ads in some markets). Other than word of mouth (which seems to be the best), I prefer two venues of marketing:

## Column In Local Newspaper
It seems that most newspapers are looking for weekly or monthly columns that discuss healthcare, preventive healthcare, diabetes, hypertension, nutrition, etc. and they are willing to run these for free. They may not be willing to pay you – but your real pay comes from the exposure to people in your community that will see you as a resource and that is where you’ll get a lot of new patients. 

Contact a few local publications and ask them if they would like a regular column from you on issues that affects their readers and then you sit down and write a few columns about allergies, how to take care of diabetes, how dangerous it is to be dehydrated and what causes it, how sleep apnea not only is indicative of stress, depression and other issues, but also leads to additional chronic diseases and problems, etc. Make them interesting and make sure that you’re allowed to give your business address and phone at the bottom of every article.

You’ll be surprised how many new patients you get from that exposure. Oh yeah – make sure it’s your doctor’s name on the article – even if someone in your practice writes it as we want the doctor’s name associated with it.

## Local Speaking Engagements
As you’ll soon figure out, Medicare patients are one of the most lucrative patients for you to have, and I’ll go into detail about why I believe that, later. For now, though, I want you to consider finding out where your local AARP groups meet for their monthly luncheons, where the senior citizens meet for daily meals and get-togethers and contact the person in charge. Tell them that you want your physician to come speak for 30 minutes monthly on different topics that affect the geriatric population, such as diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, foot care, leg pain, arthritis, etc. There are enough subjects that you could talk about for 2 years and never cover the same subject twice. You’ll find that not only will you pick up a lot of new Medicare patients, but many of their families will seek you out as their physician as well.
The nice thing about both genres is that they do not cost you any advertising dollars! The last avenue for getting new patients is a very professionally prepared website that not only describes the doctor, makes the doctor look like someone they want to take care of them with the doc’s background, family information, where the doctor goes to church, etc. - but also tells about the staff. Who is the office manager and what are the manager’s goals for the practice and the patients? Tell each staff member, with his or her photo (and make sure that every employee in the practice has their own business cards with the title of their position and you’ll find those end up in hands of prospects that will lead them to your door). Talk about the services your clinic offers, the hours, what insurances are accepted, what to do in an emergency, what your policies are for new patients, etc.

Also important on the website are the forms that you have for new patients, so the patient can complete these prior to arriving at your office, along with a list of what they need to bring with them (driver’s license, insurance card, prescription card, large denominations of cash, etc.). You may be surprised at how many patients are checking out their local physicians BEFORE they pick their doctor, by surfing the web. Give the patients a way (email address on the website) that they can email you questions while they are trying to decide if they want to come see you.