What is your policy on prescription refills? Have you adopted the policy (that we recommend) of not refilling prescriptions over the phone and/or fax or do you get 30 phone calls and faxes each day that requires a person half a day handling it? If you require all patients to bring with them, to every visit, every drug they are taking, you can avoid the phone calls. Once the patient arrives with their Wal-Mart bag or plastic baggie with their prescriptions, you can have your M.A., nurse or whomever gets the vitals, to go through them and make sure they are on the list you prescribed and see which ones are going to run out before the next visit and you can refill them during the visit. This counts towards the medical decision making portion of the visit. If the patient doesn’t bring their drugs with them to the visit, and they do call in for a refill, they can be told “We no longer refill over the phone, as you noticed on the patient information sheet, we had you sign, so you need to schedule an appointment with Stephanie (your nurse or M.A.) to review your medications and we’ll refill your prescriptions on that visit”. This way, instead of Stephanie being an expense in your practice, spending half a day each day faxing, calling, pulling charts and ambushing you in the hallway between patients to get your ok on another refill, she is generating 99211s for you.

Medicare’s allowed in 2021 is $23.84, so if she just does this 3 times a day, you’re looking at another $14,000 a year in income instead of costing you money.

It also will knock out 25 phone calls a day – while helping you practice better medicine. The reason it helps you clinically is because you will soon find out which of your patients are getting drugs from other physicians or the Veterans Administration that you are not aware of, and some of those may be contra-indicated with the meds you are prescribing.

Another thing to consider with Prescriptions is whether you are helping a company take your patients. In the past, I recommended GOOD-RX to clients. In fact, 9 out of 10 medical offices have their yellow cards in their lobby and many in their exam rooms. What you may not be aware of is that GRx bought Hey Doc a couple of years ago and they are advertising for patients to call them for telehealth visits. Yes – I am serious. It appears they are poaching YOUR patients while you help them do so by giving out THEIR cards to your patients.

Yes, the pharmacy access cards do help your patients save money on the prescriptions, and that is a fact – but instead of giving the patient the GRx card – why not help the patient even more. Click on www.saveRXS.com and either check on the prescriptions you write most often or put in your cell number and have me text you my cleverx app. Yes – Don owns the www.saveRXS.com website and when you click on it, my pricing comes up for you and your patients and you’ll find that about 60% of the time, we can save your patients more money than GRx and it is even easier. When you put in the rx, you’ll see which pharmacies in your town have the lowest rate. Ask your patient where they want the rx sent, so you’ll know and either txt the voucher to the patient (your cell phone number does not show up on the patient’s phone, so don’t worry) or just hit print and hand the patient the voucher. I take several drugs due to my heart attack I had several years ago and my Effient and Metoprolol is much, much less expensive through www.saveRXS.com than it was through Grx. Check it out.