# Case Study 1: How does a bike-share navigate speedy success?

In this case study, you will perform data analysis for a fictional bike-share company in order to help them attract more riders. Along the way, you will perform numerous real-world tasks of a junior data analyst by following the steps of the data analysis process: **Ask**, **Prepare**, **Process**, **Analyze**, **Share**, and **Act**. By the time you are done, you will have a portfolio-ready case study to help you demonstrate your knowledge and skills to potential employers!
- - - 
# Track 1 details

## On the job

The first track involves a case study similar to what you might be asked for in a job interview. You will be given a business task, dataset, and list of specific deliverables that you must present to stakeholders. The first track will help you to create a case study that you could include in your portfolio to demonstrate job skills for future interviews. You can choose from between two cases. Once you decide which case study packet to use, you will read the details, complete the analysis, and create your finished case study. 

If this track interests you, explore the case study options and decide which one you want to perform. The case study packets available for download have everything that you need to complete your case study. Then, you will be ready to upload and share your case study with potential employers.
- - - 
Case Study 1 Case Study: How Does a Bike-Share Navigate Speedy Success? Introduction Welcome to the Cyclistic bike-share analysis case study! In this case study, you will perform many real-world tasks of a junior data analyst. You will work for a fictional company, Cyclistic, and meet different characters and team members. In order to answer the key business questions, you will follow the steps of the data analysis process: ask, prepare, process, analyze, share, and act. Along the way, the Case Study Roadmap tables — including guiding questions and key tasks — will help you stay on the right path. By the end of this lesson, you will have a portfolio-ready case study. Download the packet and reference the details of this case study anytime. Then, when you begin your job hunt, your case study will be a tangible way to demonstrate your knowledge and skills to potential employers. Scenario You are a junior data analyst working in the marketing analyst team at Cyclistic, a bike-share company in Chicago. The director of marketing believes the company’s future success depends on maximizing the number of annual memberships. Therefore, your team wants to understand how casual riders and annual members use Cyclistic bikes differently. From these insights, your team will design a new marketing strategy to convert casual riders into annual members. But first, Cyclistic executives must approve your recommendations, so they must be backed up with compelling data insights and professional data visualizations. Characters and teams ● Cyclistic: A bike-share program that features more than 5,800 bicycles and 600 docking stations. Cyclistic sets itself apart by also offering reclining bikes, hand tricycles, and cargo bikes, making bike-share more inclusive to people with disabilities and riders who can’t use a standard two-wheeled bike. The majority of riders opt for traditional bikes; about 8% of riders use the assistive options. Cyclistic users are more likely to ride for leisure, but about 30% use them to commute to work each day. ● Lily Moreno: The director of marketing and your manager. Moreno is responsible for the development of campaigns and initiatives to promote the bike-share program. These may include email, social media, and other channels. ● Cyclistic marketing analytics team: A team of data analysts who are responsible for collecting, analyzing, and reporting data that helps guide Cyclistic marketing strategy. You joined this team six months ago and have been busy learning about Cyclistic’s mission and business goals — as well as how you, as a junior data analyst, can help Cyclistic achieve them. ● Cyclistic executive team: The notoriously detail-oriented executive team will decide whether to approve the recommended marketing program.