# Case Study 3: Follow your own case study path

Interested in forging your own path? This case study gives you the opportunity to choose a business question that is of special interest to you. You will need to find your own dataset, create the business task, decide who your audience will be, and more. Along the way, you will perform numerous real-world tasks of a junior data analyst by following the steps of the data analysis process: **ask**, **prepare**, **process**, **analyze**, **share**, and **act**. By the time you are done, you will have a portfolio-ready case study to help you demonstrate your knowledge and skills to potential employers!
- - - 
# Track 2 details

## Choose your own adventure

The second track involves finding a public dataset that focuses on something that interests you. You could choose any topic about which you want to analyze data -- public bike use in your neighborhood, local wildlife migration, video game console sales, or anything else you are passionate about. You can follow the steps in the case study packet to guide you through this process. The case study packet provides public dataset recommendations, example business tasks, and steps to complete your analysis. This track is the most flexible, but that flexibility means that this track can be more challenging. You will have to use everything that you have learned so far to help you to complete this case study. 

If this track interests you, explore the case study packet to learn more details, find the public dataset that you want to use, and complete your analysis. Then, you will be ready to upload and share your completed case study.
- - -