# ==9.1== ICD-10-PCS Coding and Guidelines
## History, Structure, Tables, and Organization
### Introduction
The World Health Organization has maintained the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) for recording cause of death since 1893. It has updated the ICD periodically to reflect new discoveries in epidemiology and changes in medical understanding of disease.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), the agency responsible for maintaining the inpatient procedure code set in the U.S., contracted with 3M Health Information Systems in 1993 to design and develop a procedural classification system that would replace Volume 3 of ICD-9-CM.

ICD-10-PCS was initially released in 1998. It has been updated annually since that time although not in use the entire time. Coders and CDEIs need to develop a good working knowledge of anatomy and terminology to code in ICD-10-PCS. Developing these skills will help you become a master in ICD-10-PCS.

The ICD-10-PCS code set has a logical, consistent structure that follows a logical, consistent process down to the individual character level. This means that the process of constructing codes in ICD-10-PCS is also logical and consistent. Individual letters and numbers, called “values,” are selected in sequence to occupy the seven spaces of the code, called “characters.” Once the coding system is learned, the process is simplified.

### Characters
All codes in ICD-10-PCS are seven characters long. Each character in the seven-character code represents an aspect of the procedure, as shown in the following diagram of characters from the main section of ICD-10-PCS, called medical and surgical.

| 1       | 2           | 3              | 4         | 5        | 6      | 7         |
| ------- | ----------- | -------------- | --------- | -------- | ------ | --------- |
| Section | Body System | Root Operation | Body Part | Approach | Device | Qualifier |

An ICD-10-PCS code is best understood as the result of a process rather than as an assigned number. The coding process consists of assigning values from among the valid choices for that part of the system, following the rules governing the construction of codes. It is logical and systematic in its coding approach.

### Values
One of 34 possible values can be assigned to each character in a code: the numbers 0–9 and the alphabet (except I and O, because they are easily confused with the numbers 1 and 0). A finished code looks like the example below.

>**02103D4** *Bypass coronary artery, one artery from coronary vein with intraluminal device, percutaneous approach*

Choosing a specific value for each of the seven characters derives this code. Based on details about the procedure performed, values for each character specifying the section, body system, root operation, body part, approach, device, and qualifier are assigned.

Because the definition of each character is a function of its actual physical position in the code, the same value placed in a different position in the code means something totally different. The value 0 in the 1st character means something different than 0 in the 2nd character, or 0 in the 3rd character, and so on.

## ICD-10-PCS System Organization 
ICD-10-PCS is composed of 17 sections, represented by the numbers 0-9 and the letters B-D, F-H and X. The broad procedure categories contained in these sections range from surgical procedures to substance abuse treatment and new technology. The complete ICD-10-PCS is presented in three parts: the Index, the Tables, and the List of Codes. There is also a list of guidelines in the ICD-10-PCS code book that instruct you on how to use the PCS code set.

### Medical and Surgical Section
The first section, Medical and Surgical, contains the great majority of procedures typically reported in an inpatient setting. As shown in the previous section discussing ICD-10-PCS code structure, all procedure codes in the Medical and Surgical section begin with the section value 0.

#### Coding Example
Let’s take a look at an example. The below operative report will describe the excision of a dorsal ganglion located at the wrist level. When coding ICD-10-PCS, the code is built by selecting the appropriate characters to describe the intent, the approach, and other qualifying information on how the procedure is performed.

**Operative Report:** Excision of dorsal ganglion, right wrist 
With the patient under adequate anesthesia, the right upper extremity was prepped and draped in a sterile manner. The arm was exsanguinated and the tourniquet was elevated to 290 mm/Hg. A transverse incision was made over the dorsal ganglion. Using blunt dissection the dorsal ulnar sensory nerve branches and radial sensory nerve branches were dissected and retracted out of the operative field. The extensor tendon was then incised, dissected, and retracted out of the operative field. The ganglion was then further dissected to its origin from the dorsal distal scapholunate interosseus ligament and excised. Care was taken to protect ligament integrity The wound was then infiltrated with 0.25% Marcaine. The tendons were allowed to resume their normal anatomical position. The skin was closed with 3-0 Prolene subcuticular stitch. Sterile dressings were applied. The tourniquet was deflated.

**Section 0** – Medical and Surgical
**Body System L** – Tendons (Extensor tendon)
**Root Operation B** – Excision (The tendon was excised and removed)
**Body Part 5** – Lower Arm, and Wrist, Right (The extensor tendon is located at the wrist level)
**Approach 0** – Open (An incision was performed and blunt dissection carried out through layers of tissue to expose site)
**Device Z** – No Device
**Qualifier Z** – No Device

>**Coding Note**: *The purpose of the ICD-10-PCS code is to explain the purpose of the procedure by using every character to describe the way the procedure was performed.*

| 1                | 2           | 3              | 4                          | 5        | 6         | 7            |
| ---------------- | ----------- | -------------- | -------------------------- | -------- | --------- | ------------ |
| Section          | Body System | Root Operation | Body Part                  | Approach | Device    | Qualifier    |
| Medical/Surgical | Tendons     | Excision       | Lower Arm and Wrist, Right | Open     | No Device | No Qualifier |
| 0                | L           | B              | 5                          | 0        | Z         | Z            |

### Medical and Surgical Related Sections 
Sections 0-9 of ICD-10-PCS comprise the Medical and Surgical Related sections. These sections include obstetrical procedures, administration of substances, measurement and monitoring of body functions, and extracorporeal therapies, as listed in the table below.

| Section Value | Description                                         |
| ------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| 0             | Medical/Surgical                                    |
| 1             | Obstetrics                                          |
| 2             | Placement                                           |
| 3             | Administration                                      |
| 4             | Measurement & Monitoring                            |
| 5             | Extracorporeal or Systemic Assistance & Performance |
| 6             | Extracorporeal Therapies                            |
| 7             | Osteopathic                                         |
| 8             | Other Procedures                                    |
| 9             | Chiropractic                                        |

In sections 1 and 2, all seven characters define the same aspects of the procedure as in the Medical and Surgical section.

Codes in sections 3-9 are structured for the most part like their counterparts in the Medical and Surgical section, with a few exceptions. For example, in sections 5 and 6, the 5th character is defined as duration instead of approach, as in this code for intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP):

| 1                     | 2                     | 3              | 4         | 5          | 6      | 7            |
| --------------------- | --------------------- | -------------- | --------- | ---------- | ------ | ------------ |
| Section               | Body System           | Root Operation | Body Part | Approach   | Device | Qualifier    |
| Extracorp Asst & Perf | Physiological Systems | Assistance     | Cardiac   | Continuous | Output | Balloon Pump |
| 5                     | A                     | 0              | 2         | 2          | 1      | 0            |

Additional differences include these uses of the 6th character:
- Section 3 defines the 6th character as substance. 
- Sections 4 and 5 define the 6th character as function. 
- Sections 7 through 9 define the 6th character as method. 

### Ancillary Sections
Sections B-D and F-H comprise the ancillary sections of ICD-10-PCS. These six sections include imaging procedures, nuclear medicine, and substance abuse treatment, as listed in table 2.

| Section Value | Description                                    |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| B             | Imaging                                        |
| C             | Nuclear Medicine                               |
| D             | Radiation Therapy                              |
| F             | Physical Rehabilitation & Diagnostic Audiology |
| G             | Mental Health                                  |
| H             | Substance Abuse                                |
| X             | New Technology                                 |

The definitions of some characters in the ancillary sections differ from that seen in previous sections. In the Imaging section, the 3rd character is defined as root type, and the 5th and 6th characters define contrast and contrast/qualifier respectively, as in the CT scan example below.

When coding for CT scans, the documentation must support all components for proper selection of the ICD-10-PCS code. The section for the first character will come from the Imaging section. The body system will be based on the area that is examined. The root type will be determined by the type of imaging (CT, MRI, X-ray). The body part is selected by determining the specific body area that was analyzed during the procedure. The contrast character is used to determine if high osmolar, low osmolar, or other type of contrast was used, if applicable. The qualifier character will be used to specify if enhanced or unenhanced images were taken.

#### Example: CT scan of brain
**Technique:**
2.5 mm thick axial images were obtained through the head with diatrizoate (high osmolar contrast). 0.625 mm thick axial images as well as coronal and sagittal enhanced images were also submitted for interpretation.

**Findings:**
No intra- or extra-axial blood or fluid collection is present. There is no mass or shift of midline. Brain densities are normal. The ventricles and sulci are normal in size and configuration. Vascular structures are normal in appearance. The pituitary, orbits, and paranasal sinuses are unremarkable. The calvarium is intact.

| 1       | 2               | 3                       | 4         | 5            | 6                     | 7         |
| ------- | --------------- | ----------------------- | --------- | ------------ | --------------------- | --------- |
| Section | Body System     | Root Operation          | Body Part | Approach     | Device                | Qualifier |
| Imaging | Central Nervous | Computerized Tomography | Brain     | High Osmolar | Unenhanced & Enhanced | None      |
| B       | 0               | 2                       | 0         | 0            | 0                     | Z         |

**Additional differences include:**
- Section C defines the 5th character as radionuclide. 
- Section D defines the 5th character as modality qualifier and the 6th character as isotope. 
- Section F defines the 5th character as type qualifier and the 6th character as equipment. 
- Sections G and H define the 3rd character as a root type qualifier. 
- Section X defines the 7th character as the new technology group. This letter changes each year that new technology codes are added to the system. For example, Section X codes added for the first year have the 7th character value 1, New Technology Group 1. The next year that contains new Section X codes the 7th character value is 2, for New Technology Group 2, etc.

### Index
#### Main terms
The ICD-10-PCS Index can be used to access the Tables. The Index mirrors the structure of the Tables, so it follows a consistent pattern of organization and use of hierarchies. 

The Index is organized as an alphabetic lookup. Two types of main terms are listed in the Index:

- Based on the value of the 3rd character 
- Common procedure terms 

For the Medical and Surgical and Related sections, the root operation values are used as main terms in the Index. In other sections, the values representing the general type of procedure performed, such as nuclear medicine or imaging type, are listed as main terms.

For the Medical and Surgical and Related sections, values such as excision, bypass, and transplantation are included as main terms in the index. The applicable body system entries are listed beneath the main term and refer to a specific table. For the ancillary sections, values such as fluoroscopy and positron emission tomography are listed as main terms.

In the example below, the index entry “bypass” refers to the Medical and Surgical section tables for all applicable body systems, including anatomical regions and central nervous system.

- **Bypass** 
	- by Body System
	- Peritoneal Cavity 0W1G
	- Spinal Canal 001U

The body system listings may be followed by entries for specific body parts, as in the excerpt below.

- **by Body Part**
- **Artery**
	- **Anterior Chamber**
		- Left 08133
		- Right 08123
	- **Axillary**
		- Left 03160
		- Right 03150
	- **Brachial**
		- Left 03180
		- Right 03170
	- **Common Carotid**
		- Left 031J0
		- Right 031H0

In the root operations change, insertion, removal, and revision, the device entries are further defined by the body part the device is inserted into/or on.

#### Common Procedure Terms 
The second type of term listed in the Index uses procedure names, such as “appendectomy” or “fundoplication.” These entries are listed as main terms, and refer to a table or tables from which a valid code can be constructed, as shown in the following example:

>**Cholecystectomy**
	>see Excision, Gallbladder 0FB4
	>see Resection, Gallbladder 0FT4

When two or more root operations are listed for a procedure, you must study the operative report to determine which root operation was documented as the purpose of the procedure. For example, excision means to cut out or off a portion of a body part, while resection means to cut out or off ALL of the body part. If all of the gallbladder is removed, code to resection of gallbladder.

#### Tables
Tables are organized in a series, beginning with section 0, medical and surgical, and body system 0, central nervous, and proceeding in numerical order. Sections 0-9 are followed by sections B-D and F-H. The same convention is followed within each table for the second through the 7th characters — numeric values in order first, followed by alphabetical values in order.

The following examples use the Medical and Surgical section to describe the organization and format of the ICD-10-PCS tables.

The Medical and Surgical section (1st character 0) is organized by its 31 body system values. Each body system subdivision in the Medical and Surgical section contains an introductory table that lists the possible values for the remaining characters, given that body system.

The Tables section is what is used to construct complete and valid codes. Based on the first three values of the code provided in the Index, the corresponding table can be located. The tables and characters are arranged by number, then by letter for each character.

The root operation tables consist of four columns and a varying number of rows, as in the following example of the root operation Bypass, in the Central Nervous body system.
			
##### Section Body System Root Operation
The below operative report will describe ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt placement. The purpose of a VP shunt is for a valve to be placed into your head, with one catheter being placed in the cerebral ventricle and the other end in the peritoneal cavity, hence the ventriculoperitoneal procedure name. Patients who require a VP shunt tend to be diagnosed with hydrocephalus, which is a condition where there is an accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the ventricles. The shunt removes the accumulated fluid from the brain into the peritoneal cavity.

**Operative Report:** VP shunt placement
The first incision was made at the level of the frontal area, and coagulation was used to control bleeding. Then, another incision was made at the level of the abdominal wall, and by using a tunneler, the peritoneal catheter was passed from the abdominal wall to the posterior parietal, where a small incision was also made and then up to the right frontal area. The catheter was primed, and the catheter used was a Bactiseal. Then, the programmable valve was set at 180 mm of water and was connected to the peritoneal catheter. At this point, using a previous bur hole, the Bactiseal ventricular catheter was soft passed into the ventricle and connected to the programmable valve. All of these areas of connection were then verified. Then, the peritoneal catheter was inserted into the peritoneal cavity, which was dissected in layers starting from the rectus muscle and then to the peritoneum. The catheter was introduced into the peritoneal cavity after verification of the dripping of CSF.

>**00160J6** *Bypass cerebral ventricle to peritoneal cavity with synthetic substitute, open approach*

When reviewing the description of the ICD-10-PCS code, you will notice the intent of the procedure is described with the root operation bypass, which is defined as altering the route of passage of the contents of a tubular body part. The highlighted keywords help determine the proper selection of the code, for example, the procedure required an incision in the frontal area and the abdominal wall to be able to insert the catheter. This will justify the character of “open” approach.

*(see table on page 152)*

The values for characters 1-3 are provided at the top of each table. Four columns contain the applicable values for characters 4-7, given the values in characters 1-3.

A table may be separated into rows to specify the valid choices of values in characters 4-7. A code built using values from more than one row of a table is not a valid code. In the table above, there are only five choices for the 7th character of Body Part, U, Spinal Canal. You can’t cross the line to choose a 7th character from the row above.

There are many tables in ICD-10-PCS besides the tables used to construct the codes. The appendices in the ICD-10-PCS code book contain many helpful tables.

###### Appendix A
contains a table that defines all root operations in the ICD-10-PCS code book. It lists not only the definition, but also an explanation and example(s) for each root operation. The root operations are listed by character value, in numeric order, followed by alphabetical order. For example, Root Operations - Alteration is listed with Definition, Explanation, and Examples such as face lift and breast augmentation.

###### Appendix B
is a Body Part Key. This is a very helpful tool to help match a specific body part to a descriptor in ICD-10-PCS. It is listed in alphabetic order.

###### Appendix C
is a Device Key. Similar to the body part key, it matches a device to a descriptor in ICD-10-PCS. For example, Brachytherapy seeds leads to Radioactive Element.

###### Appendix D
is the Device Aggregation Table. This table crosswalks specific device character value definitions for specific root operation in a specific body system to the more general device character value to be used. For example, the specific device Autologous Arterial Tissue, for all applicable operations in the heart and great vessels, lower arteries, lower veins, upper arteries, and upper veins leads to a General Device of 7 Autologous Tissue Substitute.

###### Appendix E
contains the Character Meanings tables. This gives an overview of the codes for an entire system in one place. The following example shows the introductory table for the Urinary system.

The following example shows the introductory table for the urinary system.

Table 3. Introductory table of values for the Medical and Surgical section urinary body system (characters 3-7)
0: Medical and Surgical
T: Urinary System

*(see table on page 153)*

###### Appendix F
contains the Substance Key. This table provides the substance term and then the corresponding ICD-10-PCS Value. For example, Seprafilm® has an ICD-10-PCS Value as an adhesion barrier.

###### Appendix G
contains Combination Clusters. This table is used for codes that require more than one ICD-10-PCS procedure code for correct reporting. An example is provided for insertion of a cardiac pacemaker lead into a coronary vein. The additional procedures describe the exact location of where the lead is inserted, which is required for correct reporting. The instructions in the Appendix specify that the first code in the cluster needs to be reported with one or more of the additional codes listed for all codes to be considered valid. In the example listed below, the codes are listed for the insertion of a cardiac resynchronization pacemaker pulse generator with the insertion of three leads. Code as many of the additional codes as are documented in the operative report.

>**02H40JZ** *Insertion of pacemaker lead into coronary vein, open approach*

and 

>**02H60JZ** *Insertion of pacemaker lead into right atrium, open approach *

and

>**02HK0JZ** *Insertion of pacemaker lead into right ventricle, open approach* 

and

>**0JH607Z** *Insertion of cardiac resynchronization pacemaker pulse generator into chest subcutaneous tissue and fascia, open approach*

###### Appendix H
contains Non-OR Not Affecting MS-DRG Assignment codes.

### List of Codes 
Although not contained in the ICD-10-PCS code book, the ICD-10-PCS List of Codes is a resource that displays all valid codes in alphanumeric order. Each entry begins with the seven-character code, followed by the full text description. The code descriptions are generated using rules that produce standardized, complete, and easy-to-read code descriptions. This list can be found in the Medicare website at https://www.cms.gov/medicare/icd-10/2021-icd-10-pcs.

## ICD-10-PCS Fundamentals
ICD-10-PCS was designed and developed to adhere to recommendations made by the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics (NCVHS). It also incorporates input from a wide range of organizations, individual physicians, healthcare professionals, and researchers.

Several structural attributes were recommended for a new procedure coding system. These attributes include the following:
- Multiaxial structure
- Completeness 
- Expandability 

### Multiaxial structure
The key attribute that provides the framework for all other structural attributes is multiaxial code structure. Multiaxial code structure makes it possible for the ICD-10-PCS to be complete, expandable, and to provide a high degree of flexibility and functionality.

**CODING TIP**
Multiaxial refers to “more than one axis” or developing on more than a single line.
			
ICD-10-PCS codes are composed of seven characters. Each character can be considered an axis. Thus, the structure of the code is “multiaxial.” Each character represents a category of information that can be specified about the procedure performed. A character defines both the category of information and its physical position in the code.

| 1       | 2           | 3              | 4         | 5        | 6      | 7         |
| ------- | ----------- | -------------- | --------- | -------- | ------ | --------- |
| Section | Body System | Root Operation | Body Part | Approach | Device | Qualifier |

A character’s position can be understood as a semi-independent axis of classification that allows different specific values to be inserted into that space, and whose physical position remains stable. Within a defined code range, a character retains the general meaning that it confers on any value in that position. For example, the 5th character retains the general meaning “approach” in sections 0-4 and 7-9 of the system. Any specific value in the 5th character will define a specific approach, such as Open.

Each group of values for a character contains all of the valid choices in relation to the other characters of the code, giving the system completeness. In the 5th character, for example, each significantly distinct approach is assigned its own approach value and all applicable approach values are included to represent the possible versions of a procedure.

Each group of values for a character can be added to as needed, giving the system expandability. If a significantly new distinct approach is used to perform procedures, a new approach value can be added to the system in upcoming years.

Each group of values is confined to its own character, giving ICD-10-PCS a stable, predictable readability across a wide range of codes. In sections 0-4 and 7-9 of the system, for example, the 5th character always represents the approach.

ICD-10-PCS’ multiaxial structure houses its capacity for completeness, expandability, and flexibility, giving it a high degree of functionality for multiple uses.

### Completeness
Completeness is considered a key structural attribute for a new procedure coding system. The specific recommendation for completeness includes these characteristics:

- A unique code is available for each significantly different procedure. 
- Each code retains its unique definition. Codes are not reused. 

A unique code can be constructed for every significantly different procedure. This vastly enhances the data capturing process.

Within each section, a character defines a consistent component of a code, and contains all applicable values for that character. The values define individual expressions (open, percutaneous) of the character’s general meaning (approach) that are then used to construct unique procedure codes.

Because all approaches by which a procedure is performed are assigned a separate approach value in the system, every procedure which uses a different approach will have its own unique code. This is true of the other characters as well. The same procedure performed on a different body part has its own unique code; the same procedure performed using a different device has its own unique code; and so on.

#### Unique Definitions 
Because ICD-10-PCS codes are constructed of individual values rather than lists of fixed codes and text descriptions, the unique, stable definition of a code in the system is retained. New values may be added to the system to represent a specific new approach or device or qualifier, but whole codes by design cannot be given new meanings and reused.

### Expandability 
Expandability was also recommended as a key structural attribute. The specific recommendation for expandability includes these characteristics:

- Accommodate new procedures and technologies. 
- Add new codes without disrupting the existing structure. 

ICD-10-PCS is designed to be easily updated as new codes are required for new procedures and new techniques. Changes to ICD-10-PCS can all be made within the existing structure, because whole codes are not added. Instead, one of two possible changes is made to the system:

- A new value for a character is added as needed to the system. 
- An existing value for a character is added to a table(s) in the system. 

### Structural Integrity
ICD-10-PCS allows unique new codes to be added to the system because values for the seven characters that make up a code can be combined as needed. The system can evolve as medical technology and clinical practice evolve, without disrupting the ICD-10-PCS structure.

## ICD-10-PCS Additional Characteristics
### Standardized Terminology
ICD-10-PCS possesses several additional characteristics in response to government and industry recommendations. These characteristics are:

- Standardized terminology within the coding system 
- Standardized level of specificity 
- No diagnostic information 
- No explicit “not otherwise specified” (NOS) code options 
- Limited use of “not elsewhere classified” (NEC) code options 

Words commonly used in clinical vocabularies may have multiple meanings. This can cause confusion and result in inaccurate data. ICD-10-PCS is standardized and self-contained. Characters and values used in the system are defined in the system.

For example, in current medical operative report terminology, the word “excision” is used to describe a wide variety of surgical procedures. However, when coding in ICD-10-PCS, the word “excision” describes a single, precise surgical objective, defined as “Cutting out or off, without replacement, a portion of a body part.” In order to appropriately select the root operation you must read the operative report to see what the intent of the operation was. If the word excision was used, you will need to verify in the documentation if the physician specifically meant cutting out or off a portion of a body part. If that is not what the surgeon performed, you will need to read the operative report carefully to see what root operation was actually performed. If the surgeon excised ALL of the body part, then that corresponds to the ICD-10-PCS root operation of resection.

The terminology used in ICD-10-PCS is standardized to provide precise and stable definitions of all procedures performed. This standardized terminology is used in all ICD-10-PCS code descriptions.
			
**CODING TIP**
Standardized terminology means that certain procedures that have been named with eponyms or common procedure names can only be looked up by the root operations. This will mean querying your physician and having a good medical dictionary at hand while coding to translate an eponym to the corresponding root operation. This change will require thought on how to look up commonly named procedures much differently than how we were taught. No eponyms or common procedure names are used in ICD-10-PCS coding.
			
As a result, ICD-10-PCS code descriptions do not include eponyms or common procedure names. Physicians’ names are not included in a code description, nor are procedures identified by common terms or acronyms, such as appendectomy or CABG. Instead, such procedures are coded to the root operation that accurately identifies the objective of the procedure. By relying on the universal objectives defined in root operations rather than eponyms or specific procedure titles that change or become obsolete, ICD-10-PCS preserves the capacity to define past, present, and future procedures accurately using stable terminology in the form of characters and values.

### No Combination Codes
With rare exceptions, ICD-10-PCS does not define multiple procedures with one code. This is to preserve standardized terminology and consistency across the system.

A procedure that meets the reporting criteria for a separate procedure is coded separately in ICD-10-PCS. This allows the system to respond to changes in technology and medical practice with the maximum degree of stability and flexibility.

### Standardized Level of Specificity
ICD-10-PCS provides a standardized level of specificity for each code, so that each code represents a single procedure variation. For example, the codes identifying all artery suture and artery replacement procedures possess the same degree of specificity.

### Diagnosis Information Excluded 
Another key feature of ICD-10-PCS is that information pertaining to a diagnosis is excluded from the code descriptions. Adding diagnosis information limits the flexibility and functionality of a procedure coding system. It has the effect of placing a code “off limits” because the diagnosis in the medical record does not match the diagnosis in the procedure code description. The code cannot be used even though the procedural part of the code description precisely matches the procedure performed. Diagnosis information is not contained in any ICD-10-PCS code. The diagnosis codes, not the procedure codes, will specify the reason the procedure is performed.

### NOS Code Options Restricted 
The standardized level of specificity designed into ICD-10-PCS restricts the use of broadly applicable NOS or unspecified code options in the system. A minimal level of specificity is required to construct a valid code. This may require the surgeon to document in greater detail than they did in the past. If the level of detail needed to code the procedure is not reported, query the physician to get the needed information. An addendum will need to be made to the operative report.

In ICD-10-PCS, each character defines information about the procedure and all seven characters must contain a specific value obtained from a single row of a table to build a valid code. Even values such as the sixth-character value Z, No device and the seventh-character value Z, No qualifier, provide important information about the procedure performed.

### Limited NEC Code Options 
“Not elsewhere classified” (NEC) options or “other specified” are also provided in ICD-10-PCS, but only for specific, limited use. In the Medical and Surgical section, two significant “not elsewhere classified” options are the root operation value Q, Repair and the device value Y, Other device.

The root operation Repair is a true NEC value. It is used only when the procedure performed is not one of the other root operations in the Medical and Surgical section.

Other device, on the other hand, is intended to be used to temporarily define new devices that do not have a specific value assigned, until one can be added to the system. No categories of medical or surgical devices are permanently classified to “other device.”

## ICD-10-PCS Applications
ICD-10-PCS code structure results in qualities that optimize the performance of the system in electronic applications and maximize the usefulness of the coded healthcare data. These qualities include:

- Optimal search capability 
- Consistent character definitions 
- Consistent values wherever possible 
- Code readability 

Some have argued that in the world of the electronic health record the classification system as we know it is outdated or, that classification doesn’t matter, because a computer can find a code with equal ease whether the code has been generated at random or is part of a classification scheme. While this may be true from an IT perspective, assignment of randomly generated code numbers makes it impossible to aggregate data according to related ranges of codes. This is a critical capability for providers, payers, and researchers to make meaningful use of the data.

### Optimal Search Capability 
ICD-10-PCS is designed for maximum versatility in the ability to aggregate coded data. Values belonging to the same character as defined in a section or sections can be easily compared, since they occupy the same position in a code. This provides a high degree of flexibility and functionality for data mining.

For example, the body part value 6, Stomach, retains its meaning for all codes in the Medical and Surgical section that define procedures performed on the stomach. Because the body part value is dependent for its meaning on the body system in which it is found, the body system value D, Gastrointestinal, must also be included in the search.

A person wishing to examine data regarding all medical and surgical procedures performed on the stomach could do so simply by searching the code range below: 0D*x*6*xxx*

### Consistent Characters and Values 
In the previous example, the value 6 means Stomach only when the body system value is D, Gastrointestinal. In many other cases, values retain their meaning across a much broader range of codes. This provides consistency and readability.

For example, the value 0 in the 5th character defines the approach Open and the value 3 in the 5th character defines the approach Percutaneous across sections 0-4 and 7-9, where applicable. As a result, all open and percutaneous procedures represented by codes in sections 0-4 and 7-9 can be compared based on a single character — approach — by conducting a query on the code ranges below.

>(0–4, 7–9)*xxx*0*xx* vs. (0–4, 7–9)*xxx*3*xx*

Adding specific values can progressively refine searches. For example, one could search on a body system value or range of body system values, plus a body part value or range of body part values, plus a root operation value or range of root operation values.

To refine the search above, one could add the body system value for Gastrointestinal and the body part value for Stomach to limit the search to open versus percutaneous procedures performed on the stomach:

>0D*x*60*xx* vs. 0D*x*63*xx*

To refine the search even further and limit the comparison to open and percutaneous biopsies of the stomach, one could add the third-character value for the root operation Excision and the seventh-character qualifier Diagnostic, as below.

>0DB60*x*X vs. 0DB63*x*X

Stability of characters and values across vast ranges of codes provides the maximum degree of functionality and flexibility for the collection and analysis of data. The search capabilities demonstrated above function equally well for all uses of healthcare data: investigating quality of care, resource utilization, risk management, conducting research, determining reimbursement, and many others.

Because the character definition is consistent, and only the individual values assigned to that character differ as needed, meaningful comparisons of data over time can be conducted across a virtually infinite range of procedures.

### Code Readability 
ICD-10-PCS resembles a language in the sense that it is made up of semi-independent values combined by following the rules of the system, much the way a sentence is formed by combining words and following the rules of grammar and syntax. As with words in their context, the meaning of any single value is a combination of its position in the code and any preceding values on which it may be dependent.

For example, in the Medical and Surgical section, a body part value is always dependent for its meaning on the body system in which it is found. It cannot stand alone as a letter or a number and be meaningful. A fourth-character value of 6 by itself can mean 31 different things, but a fourth-character value of 6 in the context of a second-character value of D means one thing only: Stomach.

On the other hand, a root operation value is not dependent on any character but the section for its meaning and identifies a single consistent objective wherever the 3rd character is defined as root operation. For example, the third-character value T identifies the root operation resection in both the Medical and Surgical and Obstetrics sections.

The approach value also identifies a single consistent approach wherever the 5th character is defined as approach. The fifth-character value 3 identifies the approach percutaneous in the Medical and Surgical section, the Obstetrics section, the Administration section, and others.

The sixth-character device value or seventh-character qualifier value identifies the same device or qualifier in the context of the body system where it is found. Although there may be consistencies across body systems or within whole sections, this is not true in all cases. Values in their designated context have a precise meaning, like words in a language.

As seen in the code example, which began this training, 0LB50ZZ represents the text description of the specific procedure “Excision of right lower arm and wrist tendon, open approach.” Since ICD-10-PCS values in context have a single, precise meaning, a complete, valid code can be read and understood without its accompanying text description, much like one would read a sentence.

The following pages define each character using the code 0LB50ZZ Excision of right lower arm and wrist tendon, open approach as an example. This example comes from the Medical and Surgical section of ICD-10-PCS.

### Character 1: Section
The 1st character in the code determines the broad procedure category, or section, where the code is found. In this example, the section is Medical and Surgical. 0 is the value that represents Medical and Surgical in the 1st character.

### Character 2: Body System
The 2nd character defines the body system — the general physiological system or anatomical region involved. Examples of body systems include Lower Arteries, Central Nervous System, and Respiratory System. In this example, the body system is Tendons represented by the value L.

### Character 3: Root Operation
The 3rd character defines the root operation, or the objective of the procedure. Some examples of root operations are Bypass, Drainage, and Reattachment. In the sample code below, the root operation is Excision. When used in the 3rd character of the code, the value B represents Excision.

### Character 4: Body Part
The 4th character defines the body part or specific anatomical site where the procedure was performed. The body system (2nd character) provides only a general indication of the procedure site. The body part and body system values together provide a precise description of the procedure site.

Examples of body parts are Kidney, Tonsils, and Thymus. In this example, the body part value is 5, Lower Arm and Wrist, Right. When the 2nd character is L, the value 5 when used in the 4th character of the code represents the right lower arm and wrist tendon.

### Character 5: Approach
The 5th character defines the approach or the technique used to reach the procedure site. Eight different approach values are used in the Medical and Surgical section to define the approach. Examples of approaches include Open and Percutaneous Endoscopic. In the sample code below, the approach is Open and is represented by the value 0.

### Character 6: Device 
Depending on the procedure performed, there may be a device left in place at the end of the procedure. The 6th character defines the device. Device values fall into four basic categories:

- Grafts and Prostheses 
- Implants 
- Simple or Mechanical Appliances 
- Electronic Appliances

In this example, there is no device used in the procedure. The value Z is used to represent No Device, as shown below.

### Character 7: Qualifier 
The 7th character defines a qualifier for the code. A qualifier specifies an additional attribute of the procedure, if applicable.
Examples of qualifiers include Diagnostic and Stereotactic. Qualifier choices vary depending on the previous values selected. In this example, there is no specific qualifier applicable to this procedure, so the value is No Qualifier represented by the letter Z.

>**0LB50ZZ** is the complete specification of the procedure Excision of right lower arm and wrist tendon, open approach.

| 1                | 2           | 3              | 4                          | 5        | 6         | 7            |
| ---------------- | ----------- | -------------- | -------------------------- | -------- | --------- | ------------ |
| Section          | Body System | Root Operation | Body Part                  | Approach | Device    | Qualifier    |
| Medical/Surgical | Tendons     | Excision       | Lower Arm and Wrist, Right | Open     | No Device | No Qualifier |
| 0                | L           | B              | 5                          | 0        | Z         | Z            |

### Find Procedure Code – Using Index
As in the ICD-10-CM, ICD-10-PCS contains an Index and a tabular section containing numerous tables. Identifying procedures using the ICD-10-PCS follows a similar process to the ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes.

- Begin in the Index to look for procedure codes. The ICD-10-PCS Index is an alphabetic listing of main terms. The main terms can represent a body part (such as Lumbar vertebra, Abdomen), a root operation (such as Resection, Inspection), or a common term (such as Thyroidectomy, Pacemaker).
- Once the main term is located, several options may be noted:
	- Instructions to see different root operations in the Index with a reference to the associated Table: Look up main term Palatoplasty in the Index, and the following instructional items are given:
>*see* Repair, Mouth and Throat 0CQ
*see* Replacement, Mouth and Throat 0CR
*see* Supplement, Mouth and Throat 0CU
- In this instance, the additional instruction requires a review of the three different Root Operations (Repair, Replacement, and Supplement) to continue the code search. Read the operative report to determine the purpose of the procedure. Then match the purpose of the procedure with the appropriate root operation (repair, replacement, or supplement).
	- Instructions to use a different main term: Look for Electrical bone growth stimulator (EBGS):
>*use* Bone Growth Stimulator in Head and Facial Bones
*use* Bone Growth Stimulator in Upper Bones
*use* Bone Growth Stimulator in Lower Bones
- Look for the main term in the ICD-10-PCS Index. Example: Total excision of pituitary gland, open. The term given is excision. However, to code correctly, you must know the definitions of all the root operations. Cutting out all of a body part is a resection. An excision is cutting out part of a body part. So, the main term is resection. Look for Resection/Gland/Pituitary referring to 0GT0. Being able to find a good main term requires an in-depth knowledge of the definitions of the root operations. Take time to study the meanings of the root operations. This will make your search easier.
- Look for 0GT table. These tables are after the Index. The numbers are first in the Index, followed by the letters.
- Select the 4th character, body part. Since the resection is for the total pituitary gland, the 4th character is 0 for pituitary gland. We already had the 4th character from the search of the Index. This confirms the code choice.
- Select the 5th character, approach. The approach was given as open. In the table, the character listed for Open is 0. This is consistent across all the tables in the Medical and Surgical Sections of the ICD-10-PCS code book.
- Select the 6th character for the device. There is only one choice, Z for no device. Remember when coding, not to cross the lines to go into another row.
- Select the 7th character for qualifier. If this were a biopsy, you would select X for diagnostic. However, since this is a surgical procedure to remove the pituitary gland, select Z for no qualifier.
- Put all 7 characters together to get the complete ICD-10-PCS code: **==0GT00ZZ==**.

### Example
Find the complete ICD-10-PCS code for laparoscopic cholecystectomy to remove the entire gallbladder.
Look in the Index for main term cholecystectomy. 

Cholecystectomy
see Excision, Gallbladder 0FB4
see Resection, Gallbladder 0FT4

Refer to Root Operations table to review definitions for excision and resection.

Since the scenario documents removing the entire gallbladder, refer to main term resection for cutting out all of a body part.

Refer to Table 0FT.
Section:   0 Medical and Surgical
Body System:	F Hepatobiliary System and Pancreas
Operation:	T  Resection: Cutting out or off, without replacement, all of a body part

The 4th character was listed in the Index as 4. Confirm in the table that 4 represents gallbladder.

Select the 5th character, approach. Stay in the same row as the gallbladder. Crossing over into another row can result in an invalid code. This gives two choices: 0 for open and 4 for percutaneous endoscopic. The example states the approach is laparoscopic. A laparoscope is inserted percutaneously through the abdominal wall. Thus, the correct choice is 4 Percutaneous Endoscopic.

Select the 6th and the 7th characters. These characters have only one option to choose from – Z No Device and Z No Qualifier.

Put all 7 characters together to get the complete ICD-10-PCS code: 0FT44ZZ.

NOTE: If you had searched for the main term, laparoscopic, the ICD-10-PCS Index entry would have led you to:
Laparoscopy see Inspection

Note that the definition for Inspection is visually and/or manually exploring a body part. This definition does not fit our example of surgically removing the entire gallbladder using a laparoscope; therefore, you should search for a better main term for the root operation or body part affected. This illustrates that one of the first steps for PCS coding is to study the root operations so that you understand their meanings. This will make it easier to start your search for the main term.

## ICD-10-PCS Official Guidelines
In order to understand ICD-10-PCS coding, it is important to become familiar with the guidelines. Following are the ICD-10-PCS Official Guidelines for 2021 for the Medical and Surgical section. The guidelines for obstetrics will be listed in the Chapter 10. The Official Guidelines and Conventions for 2021 can be found at https://www.cms.gov/medicare/icd-10/2021-icd-10-pcs.

### Medical and Surgical Section Guidelines (Section 0)
#### ==B2. Body System==

>**==B2.1a==** *General guidelines*
The procedure codes in the Anatomical Regions, General, Anatomical Regions, Upper Extremities and Anatomical Regions, Lower Extremities can be used when the procedure is performed on an anatomical region rather than a specific body part or on the rare occasion when no information is available to support assignment of a code to a specific body part.

**Examples** Chest tube drainage of the pleural cavity is coded to the root operation Drainage found in the body system Anatomical Regions, General. Suture repair of the abdominal wall is coded to the root operation Repair in the body system Anatomical Regions, General. Amputation of the foot is coded to the root operation Detachment in the body system Anatomical Regions, Lower Extremities.

>**==B2.1b==**
Body systems designated as upper or lower contain body parts located above or below the diaphragm respectively.

**Examples** Vein body parts above the diaphragm are found in the Upper Veins body system; vein body parts below the diaphragm are found in the Lower Veins body system. Chest tube drainage of the pleural cavity is coded to the root operation Drainage found in the general anatomical regions body systems. Suture repair of the abdominal wall is coded to the root operation Repair in the general anatomical regions body system.

#### ==B3. Root Operation==

>**==B3.1a==** *General guidelines*
In order to determine the appropriate root operation, the full definition of the root operation as contained in the PCS Tables must be applied.
			
**Example** Root operations are an integral component of code selection in the PCS table. For example, a transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) and a prostatectomy have different objectives. The TURP procedure removes parts of the prostate that are obstructing the urethra. This is done by endoscopic approach via natural orifice. The prostatectomy is done to completely resect the prostate from the body. The name of the procedure TURP includes “resection” in the title, which as per ICD-10-PCS definition, a resection has the intent to remove the organ completely. The TURP only removes part of the prostate which will be supported with root operation “excision” as it’s only removing part of the organ.

**Example**
*TURP*: Cystoscopy was then performed by using a #26-French continuous flow resectoscopic sheath and a visual obturator. The prostatic urethra appeared to be moderately hypertrophied due to the lateral lobes and a large median lobe. The anterior urethra was normal without strictures or lesions. Using the resectoscope and a right-angle resection loop, prostate chips were resected initially at the area of the median lobe.

*Prostatectomy*: The endopelvic fascia was incised bilaterally, and the levator ani musculature was pushed off the prostate. The dorsal venous complex was taken with a grasper and then oversewn using a 2-0 Vicryl suture. The base of the prostate was then taken down using the UltraCision Harmonic scalpel. There was significant fibrosis around the bladder base and neurovascular bundles. We were still able to spare both neurovascular bundles in their entirety.
			
>**==B3.1b==**
Components of a procedure specified in the root operation definition or explanation as integral to that root operation are not coded separately. Procedural steps necessary to reach the operative site and close the operative site are also not coded separately.

**Example** Resection of a joint as part of a joint replacement procedure is included in the root operation definition of Replacement and is not coded separately. Laparotomy performed to reach the site of an open liver biopsy is not coded separately. In resection of a sigmoid colon with anastomosis of descending colon to rectum, the anastomosis is not coded separately.

>**==B3.2==** *Multiple procedures*
During the same operative episode, multiple procedures are coded if:

>**==a.==** The same root operation is performed on different body parts as defined by distinct values of the body part character.

**Examples** Diagnostic excision of liver and pancreas are coded separately. Excision of lesion in the ascending colon and excision of lesion in the transverse colon are coded separately.

>**==b.==** The same root operation is repeated in multiple body parts, and those body parts are separate and distinct body parts classified to a single ICD-10-PCS body part value.

**Examples** Excision of the sartorius muscle and excision of the gracilis muscle are both included in the upper leg muscle body part value, and multiple procedures are coded. Extraction of multiple toenails are coded separately.

>**==c.==** Multiple root operations with distinct objectives are performed on the same body part.

**Example** Destruction of sigmoid lesion and bypass of sigmoid colon are coded separately.

>**==d.==** The intended root operation is attempted using one approach but is converted to a different approach.

**Example** Laparoscopic cholecystectomy converted to an open cholecystectomy is coded as percutaneous endoscopic inspection and open resection.

>**==B3.3==** *Discontinued or incomplete procedures*
If the intended procedure is discontinued or otherwise not completed, code the procedure to the root operation performed. If a procedure is discontinued before any other root operation is performed, code the root operation Inspection of the body part or anatomical region inspected.

**Example** A planned aortic valve replacement procedure is discontinued after the initial thoracotomy and before any incision is made in the heart muscle, when the patient becomes hemodynamically unstable. This procedure is coded as an open Inspection of the mediastinum.

>**==B3.4a==** *Biopsy procedures*
Biopsy procedures are coded using the root operations Excision, Extraction, or Drainage and the qualifier Diagnostic.

**Examples** Fine needle aspiration biopsy of fluid in the lung is coded to the root operation Drainage with the qualifier Diagnostic. Biopsy of bone marrow is coded to the root operation Extraction with the qualifier Diagnostic. Lymph node sampling for biopsy is coded to the root operation Excision with the qualifier Diagnostic.

*Biopsy followed by more definitive treatment*
If a diagnostic Excision, Extraction, or Drainage procedure (biopsy) is followed by a more definitive procedure, such as Destruction, Excision, or Resection at the same procedure site, both the biopsy and the more definitive treatment are coded.

**Example** Biopsy of breast followed by partial mastectomy at the same procedure site, both the biopsy and the partial mastectomy procedure are coded.

>**==B3.5==** *Overlapping body layers*
If the root operations Excision, Extraction, Repair, or Inspection are performed on overlapping layers of the musculoskeletal system, the body part specifying the deepest layer is coded.

**Example** Excisional debridement that includes skin and subcutaneous tissue and muscle is coded to the muscle body part.

>**==B3.6a==** *Bypass procedures*
Bypass procedures are coded by identifying the body part bypassed “from” and the body part bypassed “to.” The 4th character body part specifies the body part bypassed from, and the qualifier specifies the body part bypassed to.

**Example** Bypass from stomach to jejunum, stomach is the body part and jejunum is the qualifier.

>**==B3.6b==**
Coronary arteries are classified by number of arteries treated Coronary artery bypass procedures are coded differently than other bypass procedures as described in the previous guideline. Rather than identifying the body part bypassed from, the body part identifies the number of coronary arteries bypassed to, and the qualifier specifies the vessel bypassed from.

**Example** Aortocoronary artery bypass of the left anterior descending coronary artery and one bypass on the obtuse marginal coronary artery is classified in the body part axis of classification as two coronary arteries and the qualifier specifies the aorta as the body part bypassed from.

>**==B3.6c==**
If multiple coronary arteries are bypassed, a separate procedure is coded for each coronary artery that uses a different device and/or qualifier.

**Example** Aortocoronary artery bypass and internal mammary coronary artery bypass are coded separately.

>**==B3.7==** *Control vs. more definitive root operations*
The root operation Control is defined as, “Stopping, or attempting to stop, postprocedural bleeding or other acute bleeding.” If an attempt to stop postprocedural or other acute bleeding is unsuccessful, and to stop the bleeding requires performing a more definitive root operation, such as Bypass, Detachment, Excision, Extraction, Reposition, Replacement, or Resection, then the more definitive root operation is coded instead of Control.

**Example** Resection of spleen to stop bleeding is coded to Resection instead of Control.

>**==B3.8==** *Excision vs. Resection* 
PCS contains specific body parts for anatomical subdivisions of a body part, such as lobes of the lungs or liver and regions of the intestine. Resection of the specific body part is coded whenever all of the body part is cut out or off, rather than coding Excision of a less specific body part.

**Example** Left upper lung lobectomy is coded to Resection of Upper Lung Lobe, Left rather than Excision of Lung, Left.

>**==B3.9==** *Excision for graft*
If an autograft is obtained from a different procedure site in order to complete the objective of the procedure, a separate procedure is coded, except when the seventh character qualifier value in the ICD-10-PCS table fully specifies the site from which the autograft was obtained.

**Examples** Coronary bypass with excision of saphenous vein graft, excision of saphenous vein is coded separately. Replacement of breast with autologous deep interior epigastric artery perforator (DIEP) flap, excision of the DIEP flap is not coded separately. The 7th character qualifier value Deep Inferior Epigastric Artery Perforator Flap in the Replacement table fully specifies the site of the autograft harvest.

>**==B3.10a==** *Fusion procedures of the spine*
The body part coded for a spinal vertebral joint(s) rendered immobile by a spinal fusion procedure is classified by the level of the spine (e.g., thoracic). There are distinct body part values for a single vertebral joint and for multiple vertebral joints at each spinal level.

**Example** Body part values specify Lumbar Vertebral Joint, Lumbar Vertebral Joints, 2 or More and Lumbosacral Vertebral Joint.

>**==B3.10b==**
If multiple vertebral joints are fused, a separate procedure is coded for each vertebral joint that uses a different device and/or qualifier.

**Example** Fusion of lumbar vertebral joint, posterior approach, anterior column and fusion of lumbar vertebral joint, posterior approach, posterior column are coded separately.

>**==B3.10c==**
Combinations of devices and materials are often used on a vertebral joint to render the joint immobile. When combinations of devices are used on the same vertebral joint, the device value coded for the procedure is as follows: If an interbody fusion device is used to render the joint immobile (containing bone graft or bone graft substitute), the procedure is coded with the device value Interbody Fusion Device. If bone graft is the only device used to render the joint immobile, the procedure is coded with the device value Nonautologous Tissue Substitute or Autologous Tissue Substitute. If a mixture of autologous and nonautologous bone graft (with or without biological or synthetic extenders or binders) is used to render the joint immobile, code the procedure with the device value Autologous Tissue Substitute 
			
**Examples:** Fusion of a vertebral joint using a cage style interbody fusion device containing morselized bone graft is coded to the device Interbody Fusion Device. Fusion of a vertebral joint using a bone dowel interbody fusion device made of cadaver bone and packed with a mixture of local morselized bone and demineralized bone matrix is coded to the device Interbody Fusion Device. Fusion of a vertebral joint using both autologous bone graft and bone bank bone graft is coded to the device Autologous Tissue Substitute.

>**==B3.11a==** *Inspection procedures* 
Inspection of a body part(s) performed in order to achieve the objective of a procedure is not coded separately.

**Example:** Fiberoptic bronchoscopy performed for irrigation of bronchus, only the irrigation procedure is coded.
			
**EXAMPLE**
*Laparoscopic appendectomy*
The abdomen was prepped with solution and draped in sterile fashion. An infraumbilical incision was made and carried down by blunt dissection to the level of the fascia. The fascia was tented and incised and the peritoneum entered by blunt finger dissection. Patient was placed in the Trendelenburg position, rotated to his left, whereupon under direct vision, the 12-mm midline as well as 5-mm midclavicular and anterior axillary ports were placed. The abdominal cavity was exposed; there was no injuries found throughout the bowel and the accessory organs. The appendix was easily visualized, grasped with a Babcock’s. A window was created and the appendix was amputated from the base of the cecum. The appendix was placed within an Endo bag. The intra-abdominal cavity was irrigated. All ports were removed under direct vision and then wounds were irrigated with saline antibiotic solution. The infraumbilical defect was closed with a figure-of-eight 0 Vicryl suture. As per this guideline, most surgical procedures will require initial exploration of the area in which the surgeon is going to perform surgery. This is not a procedure that can be coded separately, as this is an integral process during the actual surgical intervention, which in this case is to remove the appendix.
			
>**==B3.11b==**
If multiple tubular body parts are inspected, the most distal body part (the body part furthest from the starting point of the inspection) is coded. If multiple non-tubular body parts in a region are inspected, the body part that specifies the entire area inspected is coded.

**Examples**: Cystoureteroscopy with inspection of bladder and ureters is coded to the ureter body part value. Exploratory laparotomy with general inspection of abdominal contents is coded to the peritoneal cavity body part value.

>**==B3.11c==**
When both an Inspection procedure and another procedure are performed on the same body part during the same episode, if the Inspection procedure is performed using a different approach than the other procedure, the Inspection procedure is coded separately.

**Example**: Endoscopic Inspection of the duodenum is coded separately when open Excision of the duodenum is performed during the same procedural episode.


>**==B3.12==** *Occlusion vs. Restriction for vessel embolization procedures* 
If the objective of an embolization procedure is to completely close a vessel, the root operation Occlusion is coded. If the objective of an embolization procedure is to narrow the lumen of a vessel, the root operation Restriction is coded.

**Examples**: Tumor embolization is coded to the root operation Occlusion, because the objective of the procedure is to cut off the blood supply to the vessel. Embolization of a cerebral aneurysm is coded to the root operation Restriction, because the objective of the procedure is not to close off the vessel entirely, but to narrow the lumen of the vessel at the site of the aneurysm where it is abnormally wide.

>**==B3.13==** *Release procedures*
In the root operation Release, the body part value coded is the body part being freed and not the tissue being manipulated or cut to free the body part.

Example: Lysis of intestinal adhesions is coded to the specific intestine body part value.

>**==B3.14==** *Release vs. Division*
If the sole objective of the procedure is freeing a body part without cutting the body part, the root operation is Release. If the sole objective of the procedure is separating or transecting a body part, the root operation is Division.

**Examples:** Freeing a nerve root from surrounding scar tissue to relieve pain is coded to the root operation Release. Severing a nerve root to relieve pain is coded to the root operation Division.

>**==B3.15==** *Reposition for fracture treatment*
Reduction of a displaced fracture is coded to the root operation Reposition and the application of a cast or splint in conjunction with the Reposition procedure is not coded separately. Treatment of a nondisplaced fracture is coded to the procedure performed.

Examples: Casting of a nondisplaced fracture is coded to the root operation Immobilization in the Placement section. Putting a pin in a nondisplaced fracture is coded to the root operation Insertion.

**EXAMPLE**
*Open reduction and internal fixation of the left fibular shaft fracture.*
An incision was made through the skin and subcutaneous tissue down to the fascia. The fascia was then split longitudinally as well. The peroneal muscles were then identified. Through blunt finger dissection, the peroneal muscles were retracted and stripped away from the lateral aspect of the fibula. The left fibular fracture site was identified. A Freer periosteal elevator was used to fully expose the fracture site and laterally for placement of the plate. Vigorous irrigation and a curette were used to remove the hematoma at the fracture site to allow adequate reduction of the left fibular fracture. With the use of a reduction clamp and longitudinal traction, the fibula was once again taken out to length and derotated to allow complete anatomic reduction. This was checked under fluoroscopic imaging and confirmed. An 8-hole one-third tubular plate was then placed over the fracture site. There were three screw holes that were proximal, one cortical screw in the fourth most proximal hole was placed in between two fracture fragments, and there were three distal holes placed. After fluoroscopic imaging, it was confirmed hardware was placed adequately.

In this specific case, the reduction is coded to the root operation Reposition, with the 6th character of Internal Fixation Device to further explain the procedure was done to reduce the fracture and stabilize with the use of plates and screws.

Coding note: ICD-10-PCS identifies the two different types of internal fixation devices. One method is Internal Fixation Device and the other is “Internal Fixation Device, Intramedullary. The CDEI specialist will require to review documentation to ensure the proper selection of the character requiring the type of fixation device used. The intramedullary nailing device is done with a technique to secure fracture repairs that happen in the long bones with diaphyseal fractures. 

>**==B3.16==** *Transplantation vs. Administration*
Putting in a mature and functioning living body part taken from another individual or animal is coded to the root operation Transplantation. Putting in autologous or nonautologous cells is coded to the Administration section.

Example: Putting in autologous or nonautologous bone marrow, pancreatic islet cells or stem cells is coded to the Administration section.

>**==B3.17==**
The root operation Transfer contains qualifiers that can be used to specify when a transfer flap is composed of more than one tissue layer, such as a musculocutaneous flap. For procedures involving transfer of multiple tissue layers including skin, subcutaneous tissue, fascia or muscle, the procedure is coded to the body part value that describes the deepest tissue layer in the flap, and the qualifier can be used to describe the other tissue layer(s) in the transfer flap.

Example: A musculocutaneous flap transfer is coded to the appropriate body part value in the body system Muscles, and the qualifier is used to describe the additional tissue layer(s) in the transfer flap.

>**==B3.18==** *Excision/Resection followed by replacement*
If an excision or resection of a body part is followed by a replacement procedure, code both procedures to identify each distinct objective, except when the excision or resection is considered integral and preparatory for the replacement procedure.

Examples: Mastectomy followed by reconstruction, both resection and replacement of the breast are coded to fully capture the distinct objectives of the procedures performed. Maxillectomy with obturator reconstruction, both excision and replacement of the maxilla are coded to fully capture the distinct objectives of the procedures performed. Excisional debridement of tendon with skin graft, both the excision of the tendon and the replacement of the skin with a graft are coded to fully capture the distinct objectives of the procedures performed. Esophagectomy followed by reconstruction with colonic interposition, both the resection and the transfer of the large intestine to function as the esophagus are coded to fully capture the distinct objectives of the procedures performed.

Examples: Resection of a joint as part of a joint replacement procedure is considered integral and preparatory for the replacement of the joint and the resection is not coded separately. Resection of a valve as part of a valve replacement procedure is considered integral and preparatory for the valve replacement and the resection is not coded separately.

#### ==B4. Body Part==
>**==B4.1a==** *General guidelines*
If a procedure is performed on a portion of a body part that does not have a separate body part value, code the body part value corresponding to the whole body part.

Example: A procedure performed on the alveolar process of the mandible is coded to the mandible body part.

>**==B4.1b==**
If the prefix “peri” is combined with a body part to identify the site of the procedure, and the site of the procedure is not further specified, then the procedure is coded to the body part named. This guideline applies only when a more specific body part value is not available.

Examples: A procedure site identified as perirenal is coded to the kidney body part when the site of the procedure is not further specified. A procedure site described in the documentation as peri-urethral, and the documentation also indicates that it is the vulvar tissue and not the urethral tissue that is the site of the procedure, then the procedure is coded to the vulva body part. A procedure site documented as involving the periosteum is coded to the corresponding bone body part.

>**==B4.2==** *Branches of body parts*
Where a specific branch of a body part does not have its own body part value in PCS, the body part is typically coded to the closest proximal branch that has a specific body part value. In the cardiovascular body systems, if a general body part is available in the correct root operation table, and coding to a proximal branch would require assigning a code in a different body system, the procedure is coded using the general body part value.

Examples: A procedure performed on the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve is coded to the trigeminal nerve body part value. Occlusion of the bronchial artery is coded to the body part value Upper Artery in the body system Upper Arteries, and not to the body part value Thoracic Aorta, Descending in the body system Heart and Great Vessels.

>**==B4.3==** *Bilateral body part values*
Bilateral body part values are available for a limited number of body parts. If the identical procedure is performed on contralateral body parts, and a bilateral body part value exists for that body part, a single procedure is coded using the bilateral body part value. If no bilateral body part value exists, each procedure is coded separately using the appropriate body part value.

Example: The identical procedure performed on both fallopian tubes is coded once using the body part value Fallopian Tube, Bilateral. The identical procedure performed on both knee joints is coded twice using the body part values Knee Joint, Right and Knee Joint, Left.

>**==B4.4==** *Coronary arteries*
The coronary arteries are classified as a single body part that is further specified by number of arteries treated. One procedure code specifying multiple arteries is used when the same procedure is performed, including the same device and qualifier values.

Examples: Angioplasty of two distinct coronary arteries with placement of two stents is coded as Dilation of Coronary Arteries, Two Arteries, with Two Intraluminal Devices. Angioplasty of two distinct coronary arteries, one with stent placed and one without, is coded separately as Dilation of Coronary Artery, One Artery with Intraluminal Device, and Dilation of Coronary Artery, One Artery with no device.

>**==B4.5==** *Tendons, ligaments, bursae and fascia near a joint*
Procedures performed on tendons, ligaments, bursae, and fascia supporting a joint are coded to the body part in the respective body system that is the focus of the procedure. Procedures performed on joint structures themselves are coded to the body part in the joint body systems.

Examples: Repair of the anterior cruciate ligament of the knee is coded to the knee bursa and ligament body part in the bursa and ligaments body system. Knee arthroscopy with shaving of articular cartilage is coded to the knee joint body part in the Lower Joints body system.

>**==B4.6==** *Skin, subcutaneous tissue and fascia overlying a joint*
If a procedure is performed on the skin, subcutaneous tissue or fascia overlying a joint, the procedure is coded to the following body part:
			
- ==Shoulder== is coded to ==Upper Arm==
- ==Elbow== is coded to ==Lower Arm==
- ==Wrist== is coded to ==Lower Arm==
- ==Hip== is coded to ==Upper Leg==
- ==Knee== is coded to ==Lower Leg==
- ==Ankle== is coded to ==Foot==

>**==B4.7==** *Fingers and toes*
If a body system does not contain a separate body part value for fingers, procedures performed on the fingers are coded to the body part value for the hand. If a body system does not contain a separate body part value for toes, procedures performed on the toes are coded to the body part value for the foot.

Example: Excision of finger muscle is coded to one of the hand muscle body part values in the Muscles body system.

>**==B4.8==** *Upper and lower intestinal tract*
In the Gastrointestinal body system, the general body part values Upper Intestinal Tract and Lower Intestinal Tract are provided as an option for the root operations Change, Inspection, Removal and Revision. Upper Intestinal Tract includes the portion of the gastrointestinal tract from the esophagus down to and including the duodenum, and Lower Intestinal Tract includes the portion of the gastrointestinal tract from the jejunum down to and including the rectum and anus.

Example: In the root operation Change table, change of a device in the jejunum is coded using the body part Lower Intestinal Tract.

#### ==B5. Approach==
>**==B5.2a==** *Open approach with percutaneous endoscopic assistance*
Procedures performed using the open approach with percutaneous endoscopic assistance are coded to the approach Open.

Example: Laparoscopic-assisted sigmoidectomy is coded to the approach Open.

>**==B5.2b==** *Percutaneous endoscopic approach with extension of incision*
Procedures performed using the percutaneous endoscopic approach, with incision or extension of an incision to assist in the removal of all or a portion of a body part or to anastomose a tubular body part to complete the procedure, are coded to the approach value Percutaneous Endoscopic.

Examples: Laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy with extension of stapling port for removal of specimen and direct anastomosis is coded to the approach value percutaneous endoscopic. Laparoscopic nephrectomy with midline incision for removing the resected kidney is coded to the approach value percutaneous endoscopic. Robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy with extension of incision for removal of the resected prostate is coded to the approach value percutaneous endoscopic.

>**==B5.3a==** *External approach*
Procedures performed within an orifice on structures visible without the aid of any instrumentation are coded to the approach External.

Example: Resection of tonsils is coded to the approach External.

>**==B5.3b==**
Procedures performed indirectly by the application of external force through the intervening body layers are coded to the approach External.

Example: Closed reduction of fracture is coded to the approach External.

>**==B5.4==** *Percutaneous procedure via device*
Procedures performed percutaneously via a device placed for the procedure are coded to the approach Percutaneous.

Example: Fragmentation of kidney stone performed via percutaneous nephrostomy is coded to the approach Percutaneous.

#### ==B6. Device==
>**==B6.1a==** *General guidelines*
A device is coded only if a device remains after the procedure is completed. If no device remains, the device value No Device is coded. In limited root operations, the classification provides the qualifier values Temporary and Intraoperative, for specific procedures involving clinically significant devices, where the purpose of the device is to be utilized for a brief duration during the procedure or current inpatient stay. If a device that is intended to remain after the procedure is completed requires removal before the end of the operative episode in which it was inserted (for example, the device size is inadequate or a complication occurs), both the insertion and removal of the device should be coded.

>**==B6.1b==**
Materials such as sutures, ligatures, radiological markers, and temporary post-operative wound drains are considered integral to the performance of a procedure and are not coded as devices.

>**==B6.1c==**
Procedures performed on a device only and not on a body part are specified in the root operations Change, Irrigation, Removal and Revision, and are coded to the procedure performed.

Example: Irrigation of percutaneous nephrostomy tube is coded to the root operation Irrigation of indwelling device in the Administration section.

>**==B6.2==** *Drainage device*
A separate procedure to put in a drainage device is coded to the root operation Drainage with the device value Drainage Device.

### Medical and Surgical
This provides the valuable reference material for the root operations in the Medical and Surgical section of ICD-10-PCS. The majority of codes reported in an inpatient setting are found in this section.

#### Medical and Surgical Tables by Body System
The medical and surgical tables are divided by body system. Body systems for Medical and Surgical section codes are specified as the ==2nd character== in PCS. 

##### There are ==31 body systems== recognized:
- 00 Central Nervous System
- 01 Peripheral Nervous System
- 02 Heart and Great Vessels
- 03 Upper Arteries
- 04 Lower Arteries
- 05 Upper Veins
- 06 Lower Veins
- 07 Lymphatic and Hemic Systems
- 08 Eye
- 09 Ear, Nose, Sinus
- 0B Respiratory System
- 0C Mouth and Throat
- 0D Gastrointestinal System
- 0F Hepatobiliary System and Pancreas
- 0G Endocrine System
- 0H Skin and Breast
- 0J Subcutaneous Tissue and Fascia
- 0K Muscles
- 0L Tendons
- 0M Bursae and Ligaments
- 0N Head and Facial Bones
- 0P Upper Bones
- 0Q Lower Bones
- 0R Upper Joints
- 0S Lower Joints
- 0T Urinary System
- 0U Female Reproductive System
- 0V Male Reproductive System
- 0W Anatomical Regions, General
- 0X Anatomical Regions, Upper Extremities
- 0Y Anatomical Regions, Lower Extremities

### Root Operations
Root operations for Medical and Surgical section codes are specified in the ==3rd character== in PCS. There are ==31 different root operations== recognized. They identify the objective of the procedure and each one carries a precise definition.

First, a table presents all root operations in the Medical and Surgical section, organized into logical groups. Following the table are definitions of each root operation, presented in the order shown in the table. Material on each root operation includes:
			
- Definition, explanation, and examples of the root operation
- Coding notes as needed 
- Coding exercises that provide example procedures and their corresponding ICD-10-PCS codes, with explanatory notes as needed

#### Root Operation Groups 
The medical and surgical root operations are divided into groups that share similar attributes. These groups, and the root operations in each, are listed in the table below.

*(see table on page 165)*

##### Root Operations that Take Out Some or All of a Body Part 
Five root operations represent procedures for taking out or otherwise eradicating some or all of a body part. These root operations are listed in the pages that follow.

*(see table on page 165)*

>**==Excision==** is coded when a portion of a body part is cut out or off using a sharp instrument. All root operations that employ cutting to accomplish the objective allow the use of any sharp instrument, including, but not limited to:
			
- Scalpel 
- Wire 
- Scissors 
- Bone saw 
- Electrocautery tip

Coding note: Bone marrow and endometrial biopsies are not coded to the endometrial biopsies root operation Excision. They are coded to Extraction, with the qualifier Diagnostic.

>**==Resection==** is similar to Excision, except Resection includes all of a body part or any subdivision of a body part that has its own body part value in ICD-10-PCS, while Excision includes only a portion of a body part.

Coding note: When an entire lymph node chain is cut out, the appropriate root operation is Resection. When a lymph node(s) is cut out, the root operation is Excision.

>**==Detachment Qualifiers==**: The specific qualifiers used for Detachment are dependent on the body part value.

(see table on page 167)

>**==Destruction==**: Physical eradication of all or a portion of a body part by the direct use of energy, force or a destructive agent. None of the body part is physically taken out. Examples: Fulguration of rectal polyp, cautery of skin lesion.

##### Root Operations that Take Out Solids/Fluids/and Gases from a Body Part
>**==Drainage==**
The root operation Drainage is coded for both diagnostic and therapeutic drainage procedures. When drainage is accomplished by putting in a catheter, the device value drainage device is coded in the 6th character. 

EXAMPLE: Thoracentesis
During a thoracentesis a needle is inserted percutaneously through the back to access the pleural cavity. This is done to alleviate with the condition known as pleural effusion, which is accumulation of fluid in the pleural cavity. The purpose of the procedure is to remove excess fluid ultimately relieving the pressure on the lung. This pressure causes the lung to collapse and prevents expansion and gas exchange.
			
>**==Extirpation==**
Extirpation represents a range of procedures where the body part itself is not the focus of the procedure. Instead, the objective is to remove solid material such as a foreign body, thrombus, or calculus from the body part.
			
CODING TIP: This type of language is new to most coders and CDEI. Extirpation means to totally destroy.
			
>**==Fragmentation==**
Fragmentation is coded for procedures to break up, but not remove, solid material such as a calculus or foreign body. This root operation includes both direct and extracorporeal Fragmentation procedures.

>**==Division==**
The root operation Division is coded when the objective of the procedure is to cut into, transect, or otherwise separate all or a portion of a body part. When the objective is to cut or separate the area around a body part, the attachments to a body part, or between subdivisions of a body part causing abnormal constraint, then the root operation Release is coded instead.

>**==Release==**
The objective of procedures represented in the root operation Release is to free a body part from abnormal constraint. Release procedures are coded to the body part being freed. The procedure can be performed on the area around a body part, on the attachments to a body part, or between subdivisions of a body part causing the abnormal constraint.

>**==Transplantation==**
A small number of procedures is represented in the root operation Transplantation and includes only the body parts currently being transplanted. Qualifier values specify the genetic compatibility of the body part transplanted.

>**==Reattachment==**
Procedures coded to Reattachment include putting back a body part that has been cut off or avulsed. Nerves and blood vessels may or may not be reconnected in a Reattachment procedure.

>**==Transfer==**
The root operation Transfer is used to represent procedures where a body part is moved to another location without disrupting its vascular and nervous supply. In select musculoskeletal body systems, a qualifier is used to specify procedures involving composite tissue transfers, such as musculocutaneous flap transfer.

>**==Reposition==**
Reposition represents procedures for moving a body part to a new location. The range of Reposition procedures includes moving a body part to its normal location or moving a body part to a new location to enhance its ability to function.

##### Root Operations that Alter the Diameter/Route of a Tubular Body Part
Tubular body parts are defined in ICD-10-PCS as those hollow body parts that provide a route of passage for solids, liquids, or gases. They include the cardiovascular system, and body parts such as those contained in the gastrointestinal tract, genitourinary tract, biliary tract, and respiratory tract.

>**==Restriction==**
The root operation Restriction is coded when the objective of the procedure is to narrow the diameter of a tubular body part or orifice. Restriction includes both intraluminal and extraluminal methods for narrowing the diameter.

>**==Occlusion==**
The root operation Occlusion is coded when the objective of the procedure is to close off a tubular body part or orifice. Occlusion includes both intraluminal or extraluminal methods of closing off the body part. Division of the tubular body part prior to closing it is an integral part of the Occlusion procedure.
			
CODING TIP: Occlusion means to completely close an orifice or the lumen of a tubular body part such as a fallopian tube. A lumen refers to the cavity or channel within a tubular structure.

>**==Dilation==**
The root operation Dilation is coded when the objective of the procedure is to enlarge the diameter of a tubular body part or orifice. Dilation includes both intraluminal and extraluminal methods of enlarging the diameter. A device placed to maintain the new diameter is an integral part of the Dilation procedure and is coded to a sixth-character device value in the Dilation procedure code.

>**==Bypass==**
Bypass is coded when the objective of the procedure is to reroute the contents of a tubular body part. The range of Bypass procedures includes normal routes such as those made in coronary artery bypass procedures, and abnormal routes such as those made in colostomy formation procedures.

##### Root Operations That Always Involve a Device
CODING TIP: A change in your current thought process is needed here to be successful.
			
>**==Insertion==**
The root operation Insertion represents those procedures where the sole objective is to put in a device without doing anything else to a body part. Procedures typical of those coded to Insertion include putting in a vascular catheter, a pacemaker lead, or a tissue expander.

>**==Replacement==**
The objective of procedures coded to the root operation Replacement is to put in a device that takes the place of some or all of a body part. Replacement encompasses a wide range of procedures, from joint replacements to grafts of all kinds.

>**==Supplement==**
The objective of procedures coded to the root operation Supplement is to put in a device that reinforces or augments the functions of some or all of a body part. Supplement includes a wide range of procedures, from hernia repairs using mesh reinforcement to heart valve annuloplasties and grafts such as nerve grafts that supplement but do not physically take the place of the existing body part.

>**==Change==**
The root operation Change represents only those procedures where a similar device is exchanged without making a new incision or puncture. Typical Change procedures include exchange of drainage devices and feeding devices.

>**==Removal==**
Removal represents a much broader range of procedures than those for removing the devices contained in the root operation Insertion. A procedure to remove a device is coded to Removal if it is not an integral part of another root operation, and regardless of the approach or the original root operation by which the device was put in.

>**==Revision==**
Revision is coded when the objective of the procedure is to correct the positioning or function of a previously placed device. A complete re-do of the original root operation is coded to the root operation performed.

>**==Inspection==**
The root operation Inspection represents procedures where the sole objective is to examine a body part. Procedures discontinued without any other root operation being performed are also coded to Inspection.

>**==Mapping==**
Mapping represents a very narrow range of procedures. Procedures include only cardiac mapping and cortical mapping.

##### Other Repairs
>**==Control==** is used to represent a small range of procedures performed to treat postprocedural bleeding. If performing Bypass, Detachment, Excision, Extraction, Reposition, Replacement, or Resection is required to stop the bleeding, then Control is not coded separately.

Coding note: Control includes irrigation or evacuation of hematoma done at the operative site. Both irrigation and evacuation may be necessary to clear the operative field and effectively stop the bleeding.

>The root operation **==Repair==** represents a broad range of procedures for restoring the anatomic structure of a body part such as suture of lacerations. Repair also functions as the “not elsewhere classified (NEC)” root operation, to be used when the procedure performed does not meet the definition of one of the other root operations. Fixation devices are included for procedures to repair the bones and joints.

##### Other Operations
>A limited range of procedures is represented in the root operation **==Fusion==**, because fusion procedures are only performed on the joints. Qualifier values are used to specify whether a vertebral joint fusion is anterior or posterior.

**==Alteration==** is coded for all procedures performed solely to improve appearance. All methods, approaches, and devices used for the objective of improving appearance are coded here.

Coding note: Because some surgical procedures can be performed for either medical or cosmetic purposes, coding for Alteration requires diagnostic confirmation that the surgery is in fact performed to improve appearance.

>**==Creation==** is used to represent a very narrow range of procedures. Only the procedures performed for sex change operations are included here.

Coding note: Harvesting autograft tissue. If a separate procedure is performed to harvest autograft tissue, it is coded to the appropriate root operation in addition to the harvest.

### Body Part
The body part for Medical and Surgical section codes are specified in the ==4th character== in PCS. The body part identifies the specific part of the body system on which the root operation was performed, such as lower arm and wrist, right. Tubular body parts are defined in ICD-10-PCS as those hollow body parts that provide a route of passage for solids, liquids, or gases. They include cardiovascular system, gastrointestinal system, genitourinary system, biliary tract, and respiratory tract.

### Approach
The approach for Medical and Surgical section codes is specified in the ==5th character== in PCS. The approach is defined as the technique used to reach the site of the procedure. There are seven different approaches recognized:
			
>**==Open==**: Cutting through the skin or mucous membrane and any other body layers necessary to expose the site of the procedure

>**==Percutaneous==**: Entry, by puncture or minor incision, of instrumentation through the skin or mucous membrane and any other body layers necessary to reach the site of the procedure

>**==Percutaneous Endoscopic==**: Entry, by puncture or minor incision, of instrumentation through the skin or mucous membrane and any other body layers necessary to reach and visualize the site of the procedure

>**==Via Natural or Artificial Opening==**: Entry of instrumentation through a natural or artificial external opening to reach the site of the procedure

>**==Via Natural or Artificial Opening, Endoscopic==**: Entry of instrumentation through a natural or artificial external opening to reach and visualize the site of the procedure

>**==Via Natural or Artificial Opening with Percutaneous Endoscopic Assistance==**: Entry of instrumentation through a natural or artificial external opening and entry, by puncture or minor incision, of instrumentation through the skin or mucous membrane and any other body layers necessary to aid in the performance of the procedure

>**==External==**: Procedures performed directly on the skin or mucous membrane and procedures performed indirectly by the application of external force through the skin or mucous membrane
			
#### The approach is made up of three components:
			
1. Access location
2. Method
3. Type of instrumentation

##### Access Location
For procedures performed on an internal body part, the access location specifies the external site through which the site of the procedure is reached. There are ==two== general types of access locations:
			
>**==Skin or mucous membranes==**: can be cut or punctured to reach the procedure site. All open and percutaneous approach values use this access location.

>**==External orifices==**: an external opening. This can be natural (for example, mouth) or artificial (for example, colostomy stoma). 
			
Every approach value, except external, includes one of these two access locations.

##### Method
For procedures performed on an internal body part, the method specifies how the external access location is entered.

>**==Open method==**: Specifies cutting through the skin or mucous membrane and any other intervening body layers necessary to expose the site of the procedure.

>**==If the objective of the procedure is to put in the device, then the root operation is Insertion. >**==Instrumentation method==**: Specifies the entry of instrumentation through the access location to the internal procedure site. Instrumentation can be introduced by puncture or minor incision, or through an external opening. The puncture or minor incision does not constitute an open approach because it does not expose the site of the procedure.

An approach can define multiple methods. For example, Via Natural or Artificial Opening with Percutaneous Endoscopic Assistance includes both the initial entry of instrumentation to reach the site of the procedure, and the placement of additional percutaneous instrumentation into the body part to visualize and assist in the performance of the procedure.

##### Type of Instrumentation
For procedures performed on an internal body part, Instrumentation means that specialized equipment is used to perform the procedure. Instrumentation is used in all internal approaches other than the basic open approach. Instrumentation may or may not include the capacity to visualize the procedure site. For example, the instrumentation used to perform a sigmoidoscopy permits the internal site of the procedure to be visualized, while the instrumentation used to perform a needle biopsy of the liver does not. The term “endoscopic” as used in approach values refers to instrumentation that permits a site to be visualized.

Procedures performed on the skin or mucous membrane are identified by the External approach (for example, skin excision). Procedures performed indirectly by the application of external force are also identified by the External approach (for example, closed reduction of fracture).

### Device
The device for Medical and Surgical section codes is specified in the ==6th character== in PCS. It is used only to specify devices that remain after the procedure is completed. There are four general types of devices:

1. Biological or synthetic material that takes the place of all or a portion of a body part (for example, joint prosthesis)
2. Biological or synthetic material that assists or prevents a physiological function (for example, IUD)
3. Therapeutic material that is not absorbed by, eliminated by, or incorporated into a body part (for example, radioactive material)
4. Mechanical or electronic appliances used to assist, monitor, take the place of, or prevent a physiological function (for example, cardiac pacemaker)

While all devices may be removed, some cannot be removed without being replaced with another nonbiological appliance or body part substitute. Specific device values may be coded with the root operations Alteration, Bypass, Creation, Dilation, Drainage, Fusion, Occlusion, Reposition, and Restriction. Specific device values must be coded with the root operations Change, Insertion, Removal, Replacement, and Revision. Instruments used to visualize the procedure site are specified in the approach, not the device, value. If the device is put in to meet an objective other than insertion, then the root operation defining the underlying objective of the procedure is used, with the device specified in the device character.

For example, if a procedure to replace the hip joint is performed, the root operation Replacement is coded, and the prosthetic device is specified in the device character. Materials incidental to a procedure, such as clips, ligatures, and sutures, are not specified in the device character. Because new devices can be developed, the value Other Device is provided as a temporary option for use until a specific device value is added to the system.

### Qualifier
The qualifier for Medical and Surgical section codes is specified in the ==7th character== for PCS. The qualifier contains unique values for individual procedures. For example, the qualifier can be used to identify the destination site in a Bypass.

## ICD-10-PCS Principles
In developing the Medical and Surgical procedure codes, several specific principles were followed. Following are the guidelines from the ICD-10-PCS code book.

### Composite Terms are Not Root Operations
Composite terms such as colonoscopy, sigmoidectomy, or appendectomy do not describe root operations, but they do specify multiple components of a specific root operation. In ICD-10-PCS, the components of a procedure are defined separately by the characters making up the complete code. And the only component of a procedure specified in the root operation is the objective of the procedure. With each complete code the underlying objective of the procedure is specified by the root operation (3rd character), the precise part is specified by the body part (4th character), and the method used to reach and visualize the procedure site is specified by the approach (5th character). While colonoscopy, sigmoidectomy, and appendectomy are included in the Index, they do not constitute root operations in the Tables section. The objective of colonoscopy is the visualization and the root operation (character 3) is Inspection. Character 4 specifies the body part, which in this case is part of the colon. These composite terms, like colonoscopy or appendectomy, are included as cross-reference only. The index provides the correct root operation reference. Examples of other types of composite terms not representative of root operations are partial sigmoidectomy, total hysterectomy, and partial hip replacement. Always refer to the correct root operation in the Index and Tables section.

### Root Operations Based on Objective of Procedure
The root operation is based on the objective of the procedures, such as Resection of transverse colon or Dilation of an artery. The assignment of the root operation is based on the procedure performed, which may or may not have been the intended procedure. If the intended procedure is modified or discontinued, such as excision instead of resection being performed, the root operation is determined by the final procedure performed. If the desired result is not attained after completing the procedure (such as, the artery does not remain expanded after the dilation procedure), the root operation is still determined by the procedure actually performed.

Examples:
- Dilating the urethra is coded as Dilation since the objective of the procedure is to dilate the urethra. If dilation of the urethra includes putting in an intraluminal stent, the root operation remains Dilation and not Insertion of the intraluminal device because the underlying objective of the procedure is dilation of the urethra. The stent is identified by the intraluminal device value in the 6th character of the dilation procedure code.
- If the objective is solely to put a radioactive element in the urethra, then the procedure is coded to the root operation Insertion, with the radioactive element identified in the 6th character of the code.
- If the objective of the procedure is to correct a malfunctioning or displaced device, then the procedure is coded to the root operation Revision. In the root operation Revision, the original device being revised is identified in the device character. Revision is typically performed on mechanical appliances like a pacemaker or materials used in replacement procedures such as a synthetic substitute. Typical revision procedures include adjustment of pacemaker position and correction of malfunctioning knee prosthesis.

### Combination Procedures Are Coded Separately
If multiple procedures as defined by distinct objectives are performed during an operative episode, then multiple codes are used. For example, obtaining the vein graft used for coronary bypass surgery is coded as a separate procedure from the bypass itself.

## Redo of Procedures
The complete or partial redo of the original procedure is coded to the root operation that identifies the procedure performed rather than Revision.

Example: A complete redo of a hip replacement procedure that requires putting in a new prosthesis is coded to the root operation Replacement rather than Revision.
			
The correction of complications arising from the original procedure, other than device complications, is coded to the procedure performed. Correction of a malfunctioning or displaced device would be coded to the root operation Revision.
			
Example: A procedure to control hemorrhage arising from the original procedure is coded to Control rather than Revision.
			
In order to get a full understanding of how to code under ICD-10-PCS, a more in-depth knowledge of anatomy is necessary. In the following sections, an overview of the body systems in the 2nd character of the Medical and Surgical section codes will be given, along with examples of common procedures performed on those systems.