# ==9.2== ICD-10-PCS Coding and Guidelines
## Specialty-Specific Examples
In this section we will review common procedures performed in the inpatient setting and how to properly identify the correct ICD-10-PCS codes.
### 02 Heart & Great Vessels 
#### Procedures
Heart catheterization procedures are the insertion of a catheter into a chamber or vessel of the heart. It may be done for investigational and/or interventional purposes. Cardiac catheterization is a general term for a group of procedures performed using this method, including coronary and ventricular angiography. Once the catheter has been placed, many other procedures can be performed, like percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI), angioplasty, balloon stents, and electrophysiology (EP) studies. The ICD-10-PCS code choice is driven by the root operation.

Ablation of arrhythmia: A catheter ablation is a procedure that uses radiofrequency energy to destroy a small area of heart tissue that is causing rapid heartbeats or arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats). This procedure is usually done in the cardiac catheterization lab during a left heart catheterization procedure.

**Example**
>PROCEDURE PERFORMED:
Left ventriculogram with Omnipaque (low osmolar contrast)
Coronary angiogram with Omnipaque (low osmolar contrast)
Drug-eluting stent placement in LAD for 95% stenosis
TOTAL FLUOROSCOPY TIME: 1.8 minutes.
APPROACH: Left heart catheterization via right femoral artery approach.
FINDINGS/INTERVENTIONS:
LEFT VENTRICULOGRAPHY: The overall left ventricular systolic function is mildly reduced. Left ventricular ejection fraction is 35%. Mild hypokinesis of the anterior wall of the left ventricle. There was no transaortic gradient. Mitral valve regurgitation is not seen.
LEFT MAIN CORONARY ARTERY: There were no obstructing lesions in the left main coronary artery. Blood flow appeared normal.
LEFT ANTERIOR DESCENDING ARTERY: There was a 95%, stenosis in the mid left anterior descending artery. A drug-eluting 3.0mm x 32mm stent was placed in the mid left anterior descending artery and post-dilated to 3.5 mm. Post-procedure stenosis was 5%. There was no dissection and no perforation.
LEFT CIRCUMFLEX ARTERY: There was a 25% stenosis in the left circumflex artery.
RIGHT CORONARY ARTERY: There were no obstructing lesions in the right coronary artery. Blood flow appeared normal.
			
A patient underwent a left ventriculogram and coronary angiogram of multiple arteries with stent intervention in one coronary artery. Even though the term “multiple arteries” is not used in the operative report, the documentation does reflect that the patient had multiple arteries (left main, left anterior descending, left circumflex, right coronary) examined during the procedure. The patient also required stent placement in the left anterior descending artery (LAD) so a drug-eluting stent was placed.

ICD-10-PCS differentiates the use of stent with an option for drug-eluting and non-drug-eluting stents. The classification will give a specific device character to select the type of stent used during the procedure. One important aspect about stent intervention is to understand how many arteries are being treated, how many will require angioplasty intervention, which is the use of a balloon catheter to dilate the artery to restore blood flow, and how many arteries will require stent placement. The ICD-10-PCS classification will code the stent placement as a dilation procedure because the objective or intent is to widen or dilate the lumen of the vessel effectively restoring blood flow.

Contrast is an important component when selecting codes for angiogram procedures. The contrast is classified to high osmolar, low osmolar, and other specified contrast. The case above reflects the use of Omnipaque which is a low osmolar contrast.

*The codes for the case are as follows:*

>**==B2111ZZ==** – *Fluoroscopy of multiple coronary arteries using low osmolar contrast* (Left main, left anterior descending, left circumflex and right coronary arteries were examined with fluoroscopy with the use of Omnipaque low osmolar contrast.)

>**==B2151ZZ==** – *Fluoroscopy of left heart using low osmolar contrast* (Left ventriculogram was performed to assess the function of the left ventricle of the heart.)

>**==027034Z==** – *Dilation of coronary artery, one artery with drug-eluting intraluminal device, percutaneous approach* (A drug-eluting stent was placed in the left anterior descending coronary artery

**Example**
Physician performs a left heart catheterization with laser destruction of arrhythmogenic focus in the A-V node.

The correct code for this scenario is 02583ZZ: Percutaneous destruction of conduction mechanism of the heart and great vessels.

0 — Medical and Surgical
2 — Heart and Great Vessels
5 — Destruction
8 — Conduction Mechanism
3 — Percutaneous
Z — No Device
Z — No Qualifier

Note: Any mapping procedures performed in the heart would code to the root operation of Map in the Medical and Surgical Section under the Body Part of 2 for Heart and Great Vessels. Any other procedures, such as hemodynamic monitoring and imaging of the cardiac arteries, would also be coded and will be discussed in Chapter 11.

Coding note: The procedure is performed during the left heart catheterization, but the purpose of the procedure was destruction of the heart conduction mechanism. ICD-10-PCS codes are chosen based on the intent of the procedure. The A-V node is part of the conduction system in the heart, so to find the correct PCS code, look in the ICD-10-PCS Alphabetic Index for Destruction/Conduction Mechanism in order to find the right table - 0258. 
			

			Bypass graft procedures — A diseased portion of artery or vein is bypassed by attachment of a healthy vessel (conduit) above and below the diseased vessel to increase the flow of blood. A healthy vessel is taken from elsewhere in the patient’s body. This is known as harvesting or procurement. The surgeon may harvest an artery, a vein, or both. The saphenous vein from the leg is one of the more common vessels harvested for use in bypass grafts.
			There are coding guidelines that will instruct you on how to code cardiac bypass procedures. ICD-10-PCS coding guideline B.36b says coronary artery bypass procedures are coded differently than other bypass procedures as described in the previous guideline. Rather than identifying the body part bypassed from, the body part identifies the number of coronary arteries bypassed to, and the qualifier specifies the vessel bypassed from. When coding aortocoronary bypass (CABG) procedures, the 7th character Qualifier, is chosen based on the part of the body where the blood is bypassed “from.” If the blood is bypassed from the aorta, the 7th character is W for Aorta. If the blood is bypassed from the left internal mammary artery, the 7th character is 9. You can verify this by looking at table 021 in the ICD-10-PCS code book.
			When coding for coronary artery bypass procedures, you should note that a separate PCS code will be assigned for each type of graft. This is PCS guideline B3.6c: “If multiple coronary arteries are bypassed, a separate procedure is coded for each coronary artery that uses a different device and/or qualifier.” Therefore, if there is a saphenous vein graft and an internal mammary graft, you will assign one code for the saphenous vein graft bypass procedure and one for the internal mammary graft bypass procedure.
			An interesting distinction can be made for the internal mammary graft. When the cardiovascular surgeon creates an internal mammary graft, he dissects through the internal mammary artery at one end and leaves the origin attached. When one end of the artery is left attached to the body, this is called a pedicle graft. The surgeon will then connect the free end of the internal mammary artery to the coronary artery that is occluded and needs to be bypassed. Because the internal mammary artery remains attached at one end, it is not coded as a device. When either a left or right internal mammary artery is used for a bypass, the device value will be Z, No Device.
			Lastly, when coding for CABG procedures, you need to review the circulation of blood in the heart to assist with selecting the body part bypassed from and the body part bypassed to. The left coronary artery and right coronary artery flow off of the aorta. The left coronary artery then branches into the left circumflex artery and the left anterior descending artery.
			In the below case, a patient requires a CABG, in which the treatment will be directed toward two arteries, the left anterior descending and the circumflex. The purpose of a CABG procedure is to restore the function of the coronary arteries that are occluded and required this surgical intervention. The code selection for a CABG will code to the root operation bypass, as the purpose of the procedure is to alter the route of the coronary arteries for restoring purposes. The CABG procedure tends to be called open heart surgery. It is also common for the cardiac surgeon to remove the saphenous vein from the lower extremities by endoscopic approach to use as the graft method for coronary artery assistance.
			The use of cardiopulmonary bypass is also expected as this machine assists as cardiac and pulmonary support while bypassing the coronary arteries. This is a reportable procedure under the ICD-10-PCS classification.

			
			Operative Report
			Procedures Performed: Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) x2, left internal mammary artery to the left anterior descending and reverse saphenous vein graft to the circumflex
			The saphenous vein resected from the right thigh was harvested, side branches secured using 4-0 silk and Hemoclips by endoscopic approach. The thigh was closed with multilayer sutures.
			A midline sternotomy was made and carried down through the sternum which was divided with the saw. Pericardial and thymus fat pad was divided. The left internal mammary artery was harvested and spatulated for anastomosis. Heparin was given. The left internal mammary artery is sewn to the left anterior descending using 7-0 running Prolene. After this was done, the patient was fully heparinized, cannulated with a 6.5 atrial cannula and a 2-stage venous catheter, and begun on cardiopulmonary bypass and maintained normothermia. The right-side saphenous graft was brought to the circumflex using running 7-0 Prolene technique. The distal other end of the graft was then anastomosed to the aorta. The bulldogs were removed. The patient maintained good normal sinus rhythm with good mean perfusion. The patient was weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass. The arterial and venous lines were removed and doubly secured. Protamine was delivered. Meticulous hemostasis was present. Platelets were given for coagulopathy. Chest tube was placed and meticulous hemostasis was present. The anatomy and the flow in the grafts was excellent. Closure was begun.
			The sternum was closed with wire, followed by pectus fascia closure with running 0 Vicryl sutures in double-layer technique. The skin was closed with subcuticular 4-0 Dexon suture technique. 
			

			ICD-10-PCS codes for the above example are as follows:
			02100Z9 Bypass coronary artery, one artery from left internal mammary, open approach (The left internal mammary was used as a bypass method to connect to the left anterior descending artery. The approach is coded to open as this was done with a midline sternotomy to expose the heart.)
			021009W Bypass coronary artery, one artery from aorta with autologous venous tissue, open approach (The saphenous vein graph was used to bypass and connect the circumflex to the aorta. The approach is also coded as open due to the midline sternotomy to expose the heart.)
			06BP4ZZ Excision of right saphenous vein, percutaneous endoscopic approach (The harvesting of the saphenous graft is separate reportable as this was done by means resecting the vein through another incision in a different anatomical area with use of an endoscope.)
			5A1221Z Performance of cardiac output, continuous (A cardiopulmonary bypass is always used to support the heart and the lungs while the heart is being operated on.
			Coding note: One important component to understand about CABG procedures is differentiating the use of arterial grafts and venous grafts while selecting the ICD-10-PCS code. You must be able to comprehend the character for how many arteries are being treated and what kind of grafts are being used. The classification distinguishes the use of arterial/venous grafts, coronary to coronary, left internal and right internal mammary artery, and thoracic to coronary artery approach.