So far, you’ve learned that an effective portfolio is essential to demonstrating your skills to future employers. Now it’s time to review the portfolio pieces you’ve created so far and the site you’re using to host them. You may already have pieces for your portfolio finished, or you may be working on them now.

Whether you are reviewing finished pieces or evaluating your works-in-progress, use these guidelines and questions to check which areas might need improvement.

If you are building your portfolio for the first time or need pointers on what else to include, refer to this [checklist](https://www.coursera.org/learn/google-data-analytics-capstone/supplement/J4RDY/your-portfolio-and-case-study-checklist).

### Evaluate your portfolio

Now it’s time to evaluate your portfolio. Select a portfolio piece to review and open it. Next, use the questions below as suggestions to help you review your work. As you answer each question, you will identify areas for improvement. When you're done, you can make these changes to improve your portfolio.

**Is there anything missing? Are you missing steps in your projects, or details in your descriptions?**

-   If you have a website, are all the pages you need accounted for?
-   If you are hosting your portfolio on an existing platform, are all your projects uploaded properly?

**Is there too much info?** 

-   Could any descriptions be revised for brevity?
-   Are there places where you include more data than you need? Could something be cut without losing the meaning or context of your project?

**Is there anything you think you shouldn’t include?**

-   Have you included references to others’ work that helped you without citing them? Can you remove them and instead include links to external work?
-   Are there any other components that might seem extraneous or unprofessional?

**Is your portfolio hosted on the most appropriate platform?**

-   There are many options for a data analytics platform, such as GitHub, Kaggle, and more. Is the one you’re using (or plan on using) the most appropriate for your needs?