
**R Markdown** is a useful tool that allows you to save and execute code, and generate shareable reports for stakeholders. As you learn more about how to use it, it can be helpful to bookmark some resources to refer to later.

This reading explores some great online resources that will help you learn more about R Markdown and how to use it to document your analysis. 

## R Markdown documentation

RStudio's [R Markdown documentation](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-1.html "This link takes you to RStudio's R Markdown documentation and training.") includes a series of tutorials that will help you learn about the main features of R Markdown, including code chunks, output formats, notebooks, interactive documents, and more. The tutorials include online lessons that you can complete directly in your RStudio Cloud workspace. 

## R Markdown reference materials

RStudio has developed a reference guide and a cheat sheet that you can bookmark and use whenever you practice writing R Markdown files.  

-   The [R Markdown Reference Guide](https://rstudio.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/rmarkdown-reference.pdf?_ga=2.49295910.1034302809.1602760608-739985330.1601281773 "This link takes you to RStudio's R Markdown Reference Guide.") contains three sections: Markdown syntax, knitr chunk options, and Pandoc options. The guide is super detailed and includes tons of examples and explanations so that you can easily find the exact information you need to customize your R Markdown documents. 
-   The [R Markdown Cheat Sheet](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-15.html "This link takes you to RStudio's R Markdown Cheat Sheet.") is a convenient summary of the different steps and workflow processes for R. It also includes sections with abbreviated explanations of knitr and pandoc chunk options, and other useful information to review or look up while you work.

## R for Data Science book

For a well-organized introduction to the basics of R Markdown, check out the [Communicate](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/communicate-intro.html "This link takes you to Chapter 26: Introduction in the Communicate section of the R for Data Science book.") section of the **R for Data Science** book. It covers the main features and functions of R Markdown, the various output formats, and the workflow for combining text and code to create an analysis notebook.

## R Markdown: The Definitive Guide 

If you want to really explore the capabilities of R Markdown in a systematic way, [R Markdown: The Definitive Guide](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/ "This link takes you to the book entitled R Markdown: The Definitive Guide.") provides a comprehensive guide to the R Markdown ecosystem. This book contains four main parts:

1.  [Part I](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/installation.html "This link takes you to Chapter 1: Installation in R Markdown: The Definitive Guide.") explains how to install the relevant packages and offers an overview of R Markdown, including the syntax for Markdown and code chunks.
2.  [Part II](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/documents.html "This link takes you to Chapter 3: Documents in R Markdown: The Definitive Guide.") provides detailed documentation of the built-in output formats included in R Markdown, like document formats and presentation formats. 
3.  [Part III](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/dashboards.html "This link takes you to Chapter 5: Dashboards in R Markdown: The Definitive Guide.") shares several R Markdown extension packages that allow you to build different applications or generate output documents with different styles. 
4.  [Part IV](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown/parameterized-reports.html "This link takes you to Chapter 15: Parameterized reports in R Markdown: The Definitive Guide.") covers advanced topics in R Markdown.