---
tags: rhc, fqhc, medicare, claims, chapter9
---
# 10.1 - RHC General Information
*(Rev. 3434, Issued: 12-31-15, Effective: 03-31-16, Implementation: 03-31-16)*

RHCs are facilities that provide services that are typically furnished in an outpatient clinic setting. The statutory requirements that RHCs must meet to qualify for the [[Medicare]] benefit are in ยง1861(aa) (2) of the Social Security Act (the Act).

A RHC visit is defined as a medically-necessary, face-to-face (one-on-one) medical or mental health visit, or a qualified preventive health visit, with a RHC practitioner during which time one or more RHC services are rendered. 

A RHC practitioner is a physician, nurse practitioner (NP), physician assistant (PA), certified nurse midwife (CNM), clinical psychologist (CP), and clinical social worker (CSW). A Transitional Care Management (TCM) service can also be a RHC visit. A RHC visit can also be a visit between a homebound patient and an RN or LPN under certain conditions.

RHCs can be either independent or provider-based. Independent RHCs are stand-alone or freestanding clinics and submit claims to a [[Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC)]] (MAC). They are assigned a CMS Certification Number (CCN) in the range of XX3800-XX3974 or XX8900-XX8999. Provider-based RHCs are an integral and subordinate part of a hospital (including a critical access hospital (CAH), skilled nursing facility (SNF), or a home health agency (HHA)).

## Links
Information on RHC covered services, visits, payment policies, and other information can
be found in Pub. 100-02, Medicare Benefit Policy Manual, chapter 13,
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/Downloads/bp102c13.pdf.

Information on certification requirements can be found in Pub. 100-07, Medicare State
Operations Manual, Chapter 2, http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/Downloads/som107c02.pdf.