Do you have a no-show policy that results in the patient having to pay a fee? If not – then you are not holding your patients responsible for keeping their appointments and there is no negative consequence to them not keeping their appointment. When they fail to keep their appointment, they are showing disrespect to you and your valuable time. I recommend you consider charging the non-Medicaid patient a fee of $25 for missing an office visit and a $50 fee for no-showing on a scheduled procedure. If there is no negative consequence to a negative action, then people will continue to perform the negative action.

That is the same reason why there is a fine for speeding, illegal parking, etc… As a parent, did you not institute some kind of penalty for failing to follow rules, such as a spanking or grounding if your child skipped school? If you didn’t have the penalty, then there was nothing to make the child follow the rules and the same thing applies to your patients. Yes – I know that many have a 3-strike rule saying that if you miss 3 appointments, then you’ll be discharged from the practice.

This is the same thing as telling your child that they do not have to obey you the first 2 times that you tell them something (I’ll count to 3!!!!). I have NEVER, in 27 years, had a client tell me that they lost even one patient that they didn’t want to lose, because they instituted a policy of charging for no-shows. You cannot charge a no-show fee to Medicaid (per CMS), but you can charge it to everyone else – including Medicare patients (but not the Medicare program) – so go for it. In fact, in some states, if the state makes the appointment for the patient (such as workers comp), you’ll find the state will pay the fee. 

As to Medicaid, you SHOULD notify Medicaid in your state every time a Medicaid patient doesn’t keep their appointment as well and inform your Medicaid patients that failure to keep those appointments COULD result in them losing their Medicaid privileges. You can also divorce your Medicaid patient for failing to keep their appointments, but make sure that policy is in what you give the patients on their first visit. 

By the way – a no-show fee is NOT charging an office visit code – as that would be fraudulent billing. You can create your own 5-digit code (since most computer programs are designed to hold CPT and HCPCS codes – which are 5 digits), such as NOSHO or MISSD or something similar. Each month, when you run your reports, you’ll be able to see how many no-shows you had. Also – the question comes up about whether you should hold the patient responsible to pay for the no-show fee if you ever have to turn the account to collection. The answer is YES!!! They owe it. Does your bank hold you responsible for paying the overdraft fee when YOU bounce a check? Does your Mortgage Company or utility hold you responsible for paying a late payment fee?

Of course, they do – because they treat you like an adult – and it is definitely time you did the same with your patients.