  
Question 1

**Finished all courses in the Google Data Analytics Certificate?** 

Huge congrats! As a Google Data Analytics program grad, you’ve unlocked exclusive job search resources.

**Take <5 minutes** now to sign up for these _free_ (courtesy of Google) tools:

**Make sure to use the same email address that you use to log into Coursera so that we can quickly confirm that you completed the certificate. 

_If you have not yet completed courses 1-8 in the Google Data Analytics Certificate program, you will_ _not_ _be able to access these resources. Once you pass all graded assessment in courses 1-5, you will unlock your access._

## **Earn** **your Google Data Analytics Certificate** (DONE!)

## [**Create**](https://googlecerts.courserajobplatform.org/profiles/sign_up) **your job platform profile** (~2 min)

_Hint: Just add your name and city. You can fill out the full profile later._

Find and apply to local data analyst jobs, including those available through our Google Data Analytics Certificate affiliate employers.   _**You must sign up to access the job platform using the email address associated with your Coursera account. Only completers of_ _all 8 courses with verified certificates_ _will be accepted to the job platform. Must be eligible to work in the US._

## **Claim your Credly badge** (<1 min)

Claim your Google Data Analytics Certificate of Completion badge. You should receive an email within one week of certificate completion. You can then post your badge on LinkedIn and other networks to capture the attention of employers.

## [**Activate**](https://googlecerts.biginterview.com/) (done? start using!) **your Big Interview access** (<1 min)

Build your resume, participate in mock interviews, and receive job search tips. As a completer, you’ve earned 1 year of free access (a $79/month value).

Coursera Honor Code  [Learn more](https://learner.coursera.help/hc/articles/209818863)