Since preparation is key to nailing interviews and landing a new job, we’ve worked with [Big Interview](https://biginterview.com/ "This link takes you to the Big Interview home page."), an online interview preparation platform, to create interactive interview tools specifically for data analytics learners like you. 

We’re excited to be able to offer you 12 months of free access (originally a $79/month value) as part of the Google Data Analytics Certificate! You’ve earned it.

On **Big Interview** you can:

-   Practice answering interview questions in a recorded environment that allows you to get feedback and hone your interviewing skills
    
-   Prepare a resume using their resume-building tool
    

Follow the steps below to sign up for your **Big Interview** account and start practicing:

1.  Go to [googlecerts.biginterview.com/](https://googlecerts.biginterview.com/ "This link takes you to the page Big Interview page designed in partnership with Grow with Google.").
    
2.  Click **Register**.
    
3.  Register with your name, email address, and password.
    
4.  Log in.
    
5.  Go to the **Learn** page.
    
6.  Click **Google Certificates Practice Sets**.
    
7.  Choose **Data Analytics** to begin practicing!

Looking for a job? Don’t forget about the FREE (courtesy of Google) career resources exclusively available to certificate completers, like you:  
  
Coursera Job Platform (Googlecerts.courserajobplatform.org)  
Find and apply to jobs, including those available through our certificate affiliate employers. *Must be eligible to work in the US.  
  
CareerCircle (CareerCircle.com)  
CareerCircle is sponsored by Google and works one-on-one with Google Certificate completers to connect them with jobs. *Must be eligible to work in the US.  
  
Big Interview (Googlecerts.biginterview.com)  
Build your resume, participate in mock interviews, and receive job search tips. As a completer, you’ve earned 1 year of free access (a $79/month value). *Free access only available for 1 year after certificate completion.