It is important to understand the key components of both a portfolio and case study, as both are essential to success when applying for jobs. The following are checklists to help cover your bases. If you'd like to refer to this checklist in the future, you can download the PDF below:

[Your portfolio and case study checklist.pdf](https://d18ky98rnyall9.cloudfront.net/NQfW0r6WQsmH1tK-luLJeg_cf9d5450675649f1a49897eda567916d_Your-portfolio-and-case-study-checklist.pdf?Expires=1629849600&Signature=IYXABSmD1kuSVbVapoAtYT2HUdkQ2JxgHIWrY20yVMxmqK7B6UtHwhzURd0xZbEH2GOWn2J4XwU5NssC78arziXIN4A-Rlm7ObNG2LXLKIEC~xULHDV7~Wua7AtVVt4HmJfmV7FTp8GtEIczZo0gsGPOlIDR5uXasNfmWXDS49s_&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLTNE6QMUY6HBC5A)

## What to include in your portfolio

Even if you don’t have previous data analytics work experience, you can still craft a great portfolio that represents your new skills and offers insight into who you are. Be sure to include the following in your portfolio:

-   **Biography**: The main focus of your portfolio is to introduce yourself in a strong and memorable way. Write a concise and clear introduction of yourself. The goal is to capture your audience’s interest and compel them to want to meet you to learn more. 
    
-   **Contact page**: Be sure to include a way for others to get in touch with you, whether it be via email, phone call (if you are comfortable), or social media handles (especially LinkedIn). You might find that your website has its own built-in contact form if you use common website builders. 
    
-   **Resume**: In previous readings, [Adding Professional Skills to your Resume](https://www.coursera.org/learn/process-data/supplement/8FBgn/adding-professional-skills-to-your-resume "Adding Professional Skills to your Resume") and [Adding Soft Skills to your Resume](https://www.coursera.org/learn/process-data/supplement/U8xZj/adding-softs-skills-to-your-resume "Adding Soft Skills to your Resume"), you learned how to craft a resume that reflects your skills and your experience. Be sure to include a resume somewhere in your portfolio.
    
-   **Accomplishments**: You are not just limited to your past experiences. Any present career-worthy highlights you can think of should be included. This can be any certifications you have earned, data analytics events you have attended, or even blog posts you have published.
    
-   **An image of you (optional)**: Add a personal touch with your photo. All you need is a simple, clear photo that represents you well.
    

## What to include in a case study

During your interview process, you will very likely encounter the case study interview. In this interview, you will be provided with a business-related scenario where you analyze a problem and come up with the best solution. You will have a certain amount of time to solve this so it is best to be prepared for any scenario you are given. A great case study will include the following:

-   **Introduction**: Make sure to state the purpose of the case study. This includes what the scenario is and an explanation on how it relates to a real-world obstacle. Feel free to note any assumptions or theories you might have depending on the information provided. 
    
-   **Problems**: You need to identify what the major problems are, explain how you have analyzed the problem, and present any facts you are using to support your findings.
    
-   **Solutions**: Outline a solution that would alleviate the problem and have a few alternatives in mind to show that you have given the case study considerable thought. Don’t forget to include pros and cons for each solution.
    
-   **Conclusion**: End your presentation by summarizing key takeaways of all of the problem-solving you conducted, highlighting what you have learned from this.
    
-   **Next steps**: Choose the best solution and propose recommendations for the client or business to take. Explain why you made your choice and how this will affect the scenario in a positive way. Be specific and include what needs to be done, who should enforce it, and when.
    

## Examples of interview case study questions

Get a better idea of an employer's expectations from the case study questions in this blog article: [4 Case Study Questions for Interviewing Data Analysts at a Startup](https://www.holistics.io/blog/startup-data-analyst-interview-case-studies/ "Four Case Study Questions for Interviewing Data Analysts at a Startup").